<doc id="22107811" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22107811" title="Neil Etheridge">
Neil Etheridge

Neil Leonard Dula Etheridge (born 7 February 1990) is a professional footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for club Cardiff City and the Philippines national team. He joined the Fulham Academy after three years as a trainee at Chelsea and made his debut for Fulham in UEFA Europa League against Danish club Odense Boldklub, though he never played in a league match with the club. While with Fulham from 2006 until 2014 he was loaned to various lower tier clubs; Leatherhead, Charlton Athletic, Bristol Rovers, and Crewe Alexandra.

After leaving Fulham, Etheridge signed with Oldham Athletic before he was loaned to Charlton Athletic. He joined Charlton on a permanent basis in 2015 after his contract with Oldham ended. After months of being without a club, Etheridge joined Walsall making more than 90 appearances in all competitions in two seasons before moving to Championship club Cardiff City in 2017. 

After establishing himself as first choice goalkeeper, he helped the Welsh side win promotion to the Premier League and became the first Filipino player to play in the Premier League in August 2018. A former England Schoolboys international, he now represents the Philippines at senior international level.

Etheridge was born in Enfield, London to Englishman Martin Etheridge and Filipina Merlinda Dula, a native of Tarlac. He took up football at the age of nine, initially playing as a left midfielder or striker before switching to playing as a goalkeeper in 2000 after volunteering to switch due to an injury to his youth side's regular goalkeeper. He attended Court Moor School in Fleet, Hampshire, where he also represented Hampshire Schools and the Aldershot & Farnborough district teams.

Having played for local youth sides Cuffy Chiefs and Hart Boys, Etheridge began attending the Chelsea Academy in 2003 at under-14 level, where he was also teammates with eventual Philippine internationals James and Phil Younghusband. He started out as a forward but eventually switched to playing as a goalkeeper at the suggestion of his coach.

In 2006, he moved to local rivals Fulham, and signed professional terms for the club. Etheridge signed for Isthmian League Division One South club Leatherhead in September 2008 on loan for the entire 2008–09 season and made his debut on 20 September in the 2–1 home defeat to Metropolitan Police. During his loan spell, he received the first red card of his career, being sent off for dissent during a 2–1 defeat to Sittingbourne in a preliminary round of the FA Cup.

In September 2009, Etheridge underwent surgery on both knees after suffering from tendinitis. He was expected to be out for the entire 2009–10 season but returned in January 2010, eventually making nine appearances for the reserves. By the end of the season he signed a new one-year deal, keeping him at Fulham until the summer of 2011, attributing his contract extension to his quick recovery.
Etheridge received his first senior team call-up on 11 September 2010, when he was named on the substitute bench as cover for Mark Schwarzer in a home game against Wolverhampton Wanderers due to an injury to regular second choice goalkeeper David Stockdale. In March 2011, Etheridge joined League One club Charlton Athletic on loan, but was recalled six days later without playing for them. Etheridge signed a new contract in May that would extend his stay at Craven Cottage until the summer of 2013.

He made his first senior appearance for Fulham against Odense Boldklub in the 2011–12 UEFA Europa League on 14 December. On 23 March 2012 upon his return to Fulham after completing his international duties, it was announced that Etheridge would be out for the rest of the season due to a wrist injury that was sustained in the 2012 AFC Challenge Cup. He recovered quickly and on 9 May he has been able to play in the development squad's last game of the season against the reserves of West Bromwich Albion.

He joined League Two club Bristol Rovers on an initial one-month loan on 20 September 2012. He made his first Football League appearance for Rovers against Fleetwood Town on 22 September, which was his and Rovers' first clean sheet of 2012–13 season. His arrival at the club coincided with an improvement in the club's form, leading to his loan deal being extended until December 2013. On 21 November, Fulham confirmed that Etheridge had been recalled from his loan at Bristol Rovers.

Etheridge signed a one-year extension to his Fulham contract on 8 May 2013, with the option of a further year extension. On 22 November 2013, he joined League One club Crewe Alexandra on loan until 1 January 2014. He rejoined the club once again on 25 February 2014 on loan until 13 April, but was recalled on 4 April by Fulham. At the end of 2013–14 season, he was released by Fulham.

Following his release from Fulham, Etheridge used his own money to train with Charlton, one of his former loan clubs, where he knew the goalkeeping coach. Struggling to make a living, he was set to return to the Philippines and had already sold his house and cars before joining League One club Oldham Athletic on a two-month deal on 30 October 2014. During his time with the club, he lived at his friend's house, sleeping on the sofa, later describing his situation as "what you’ve got to do to get by." Etheridge later reminisced on his circumstances, stating that he questioned whether he would ever play football again. He made one appearance for Oldham during his time with the club during a Football League Trophy match against Preston North End.

Etheridge rejoined Charlton Athletic on 27 November 2014 on a one-month loan deal. He made his league debut, for Charlton on 26 December 2014, in a 1–1 draw against Cardiff City. Manager Bob Peeters had opted to play Etheridge, Charlton's third choice goalkeeper, ahead of second choice Nick Pope whose performances in previous games Peeters had described as "a bit unlucky". After the loan, he signed a signed a short-term contract on 5 January 2015 with Charlton until the end of the 2014–15 season. He was released on 12 May 2015 following the end of his contract.

Etheridge joined League One club Walsall on 2 July 2015 after agreeing a two-year deal. Signed to compete with Craig MacGillivray for the first choice goalkeeper spot, he made his debut for the club on the opening day of the 2015–16 season in a 1–1 draw with his former club Oldham. Etheridge credits Walsall's goalkeeper coach Neil Cutler with improving his ability, commenting that Cutler had "taken me to another level." Cutler himself praised Etheridge's progression, stating "with a bit more experience he can go as high as he wants because he makes match-winning saves." In his first season, he made 50 appearances in all competitions, helping the side reach the League One play-offs where they suffered defeat in the semi-final to Barnsley.

During his second season with Walsall, Etheridge was one of just four senior players retained from the previous year. He kept 12 clean sheets in 44 appearances as the club finished the season in 14th place, missing the last five matches of the season due to injury. In January 2017, Cardiff City approached Walsall over a potential transfer but pulled out due to the asking price. He played a total of 94 matches with Walsall during his two seasons at the club.

On 30 May 2017, Etheridge signed for Championship club Cardiff City on a free transfer, after rejecting a new three-year contract with Walsall. Etheridge made his debut for the club on the opening day of the 2017–18 season, keeping a clean sheet during a 1–0 victory over Burton Albion. Etheridge performed well enough playing for Cardiff that fellow goalkeeper Lee Camp was loaned to Sunderland after recovering from injury. He helped his club earn promotion to the Premier League, featuring in 45 out of 46 league matches of the 2017–18 Championship season, keeping 19 clean sheets and conceding 37 goals.

Following the club's promotion, Etheridge was rewarded with a new three-year contract by the club. On 11 August 2018, he became the first player from the Philippines and Southeast Asia to play in the Premier League, in a 2–0 loss to Bournemouth, during which he saved a penalty from Callum Wilson. His penalty save also made him the first goalkeeper to save a penalty on his Premier League debut since Allan McGregor for Hull City in 2013. A week later, he saved another penalty in injury time, from Newcastle United's Kenedy, to guarantee a goalless draw. Etheridge's impressive form led to him being nominated for the August Player of the Month award.

Etheridge is a former England under-16 international, having played in the 2005 Victory Shield, in which England and Wales eventually shared the trophy. Despite having represented England at youth level, he remained eligible to represent the Philippines through his mother.

In 2007, Etheridge received an invitation to play for the Philippines but declined the offer, citing unfamiliarity with the language and the players. He was again invited in early 2008, this time by the new Philippine Football Federation president Jose Mari Martinez. He eventually accepted the invitation after speaking to the new manager and learning about the set up, and after encouragement from Chelsea youth teammate Phil Younghusband. He officially switched allegiance to the Philippines in April 2008. He made his full international debut against Brunei in the 2008 AFC Challenge Cup qualifiers, playing in all three of his country's matches. He kept three clean sheets but the Philippines still failed to qualify due to an inferior goal difference to group winners Tajikistan.

He was called up again later that year for the 2008 AFF Suzuki Cup qualification matches. In their opening match, Etheridge got his fourth successive clean sheet, as the Philippines defeated Timor-Leste 1–0. However, in their remaining three fixtures, Etheridge conceded five goals as the Philippines won another match, drew one and lost one, before being eliminated on the basis of their goals scored record after finishing tied for second. Etheridge would later credit his debut for the Philippines in 2008 to his later progress in his club career in 2018 due to having experienced playing for the national team before a crowd of up to 90,000.

In 2010, Etheridge was named in the Philippines' squad for the 2010 AFF Suzuki Cup. The Philippines came in second in their group, with one win and two draws, and conceding only one goal. But both legs of the semi-finals ended in 1–0 defeats for the Philippines against Indonesia. He was then called up for his country for the AFC Challenge Cup Qualifiers where he conceded only a single goal, enabling the Philippines to qualify for the group stage. Etheridge announced his interest to join the squad for the 2012 AFC Challenge Cup but was originally in doubt to be included due to club commitments. However, after receiving clearance from Fulham to travel, he was included in the final 23-man squad.

On 9 March 2012 against North Korea, he saved a penalty taken by Pak Song-chol in the 16th minute as the match ended 2–0. He was sent off in the closing minutes of the semi-final match against Turkmenistan, which the Philippines lost 2–1. Due to the red card, he was suspended for the subsequent third place play-off match, where the Philippines defeated Palestine 4–3.

In August 2014, Etheridge was not included in the training squad for the 2014 Peace Cup, which also serves as the country's preliminary squad for the 2014 AFF Suzuki Cup, due to a lack of first team club football. He labelled manager Thomas Dooley "disrespectful" over the omission.

In October 2016, it was announced that Etheridge would not be included in the 2016 AFF Championship squad, because of club commitments with Walsall. Etheridge expressed disappointment of missing out on the regional championship, but added that he was committed to playing for his club. In 2018, Etheridge was part of the Philippines' squad that qualified for the AFC Asian Cup for the first time in the nation's history. However, the national side and his club side Cardiff reached an agreement to allow Etheridge to miss the tournament in order to focus on his place as the Premier League side’s first choice goalkeeper.

In the Philippines, Etheridge has worked as an underwear model. In 2015, he opened the Neil Etheridge Goalkeeping Academy in Manila.

Cardiff City



</doc>
<doc id="4294949" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4294949" title="Lee Peltier">
Lee Peltier

Lee Anthony Peltier (born 11 December 1986) is an English professional footballer who plays for Premier League club Cardiff City as a defender. While capable of playing anywhere across the defensive line and in midfield, he primarily features at right-back or centre-back. He started his career with his hometown club Liverpool, making his professional debut as a teenager in 2006. However, after loan spells with Hull City and Yeovil Town he signed for the latter on a permanent basis in 2008.

In 2009, he joined Huddersfield Town, where he made over 100 appearances and reached the 2011 Football League One play-off Final, before signing for Leicester City. After a single season, he moved to Leeds United, where he was appointed club captain on arrival. He fell out of favour in his second season at the club and, after a brief loan spell with Nottingham Forest, he rejoined Huddersfield Town. 

In 2015, he signed for Cardiff City, where he has made over 100 appearances and helped the club win promotion to the Premier League after finishing as Championship runners-up during the 2017–18 season. He is also a former England under-18 international.

Born in Toxteth, Liverpool, Peltier attended St. Patrick's Roman Catholic Primary School and Campion High School in his hometown. Peltier first attended football matches at Tranmere Rovers and later Liverpool after joining the club's academy.

Peltier joined the Liverpool Academy in 1997 at the age of ten and signed his first professional contract with the club in 2004. Initially playing as a centre-back, he converted to right-back and also featured as a midfielder for the club's youth sides before settling into a full-back role after being promoted to the senior side. In August 2006 he was named in the first-team squad, as an unused substitute for a UEFA Champions League qualifier against Maccabi Haifa. Two months later, he made his professional debut in a League Cup tie against Reading on 25 October 2006. Two months later, he made his Champions League debut for Liverpool against Galatasaray. He played the full 90 minutes at right-back as Liverpool lost 3–2.

On 16 March 2007, Peltier was subject to an emergency loan cover agreement, and subsequently joined Championship side Hull City until the end of the season in order to gain first team experience. He made his debut in a 4–0 victory against Southend United and went on to make seven appearances for the club in the final two months of the 2007–08 season.

In order to gain further first team opportunities, manager Rafael Benítez loaned Peltier to League One club Yeovil Town on 31 July 2007 until 31 December. Peltier agreed to join the club following encouragement from his mother. Eleven days later, he made his debut in a 1–0 defeat against Huddersfield Town. Although a right-back, Peltier played as a midfielder during an FA Cup match against Torquay United in November, but switched back to his original position against Gillingham after one week. He made 21 appearances in all competitions during his loan spell without scoring.

On 21 January 2008, he joined Norwich City on trial, featuring in a reserve team fixture against Colchester United, but was not offered a contract by manager Glenn Roeder. On 31 January 2008, he returned to Yeovil on a permanent basis for a small fee, signing a three-year contract. He ended the season having made 38 appearances in all competitions, including his original loan spell, and won the club's Young Player of the Year award.

In his second season with Yeovil, Peltier made 39 appearances in all competitions, scoring his only goal for the club in a 3–2 victory over Swindon Town on 20 December 2008. His performances attracted attention from several clubs and Yeovil assistant manager Nathan Jones confirmed that the club would not "stand in his way [...] if the price was right." Despite his positive performancea, Peltier later admitted to suffering from homesickness during his spell with Yeovil having moved away from Liverpool for the first time, commenting "I was quite happy with my football but [...] I struggled a bit and got quite homesick."

On 30 June 2009, he joined fellow League One side Huddersfield Town on a three-year contract for an undisclosed fee. Peltier had previously impressed manager Lee Clark during his brief trial spell with Norwich, where Clark was serving as assistant manager. He made his debut in a 2–2 draw against Southend United at Roots Hall on 8 August 2009. He was switched from right-back to left-back for Huddersfield's game against Millwall due to the usual left-back Dean Heffernan being out with a dead leg. He was Town's first choice left-back keeping the position for the remainder of the regular season. Peltier helped Town to reach the play-offs in League One playing at left-back for the first leg at home to Millwall, but was forced to return to his usual position of right-back for the second leg at the New Den due to an injury to Tom Clarke in the first leg of the play-off semi final.

Peltier was voted the Players' Player of the Season, in his first season with Huddersfield, after making a total of 50 appearances in all competitions as Huddersfield finished sixth in the regular season before losing 2–0 to Millwall in the Play-Off semi-final second leg on 18 May 2010. In July 2010, Peltier was linked with a £3 million pound move to Queens Park Rangers managed by Neil Warnock. However, in August 2010, he signed a new contract at Huddersfield to extending his deal until 2014.

Peltier remained first choice full back the following season. He received the first red card of his senior career during a 5–1 defeat to Premier League side Everton in the first round of the League Cup, being shown a second yellow after conceding a penalty. On 16 November 2010, he scored his first goal for Huddersfield in their FA Cup first round replay against Cambridge United at the Galpharm Stadium, where Town came from 1–0 down to win 2–1 with two goals in extra time. His first league goal for Town came in their 3–1 win against Milton Keynes Dons at Stadium MK on 22 April 2011.

He made 53 appearances for the club during the season, helping the side reach the League One play-offs. During the first leg, he suffered a hamstring injury during a 1–1 draw with AFC Bournemouth but overcame fitness doubts play in the second leg, scoring his third goal of the season in a 3–3 draw as Huddersfield reached the final via a penalty shootout. In his last game for the club, Peltier failed to gain promotion at Huddersfield after losing 3–0 to Peterborough United in the 2011 League One play-off final.

Within hours of Huddersfield's League One playoff defeat, the club received enquiries for several players including Peltier. 
On 22 June 2011, he signed for Championship side Leicester City, becoming Sven-Göran Eriksson's first signing of the summer after agreeing a three-year deal at the King Power Stadium. He had been recommended to Eriksson by his assistant Derek Fazackerley who had previously worked with Peltier at Huddersfield where Fazackerley had worked as Lee Clark's assistant. The initial fee was reported to be around £750,000 as part of a package worth over £1 million. On 6 August 2011, Peltier scored the winning goal during his league debut, in a 1–0 victory over Coventry City, in the opening game of Leicester's 2011–12 season. However, the club struggled for form at the start of the season which lead to Eriksson's dismissal at the end of October having spent over £10 million on new signings. Over the course of the season Peltier made 40 league appearances, scoring twice, and was the club's first choice right-back, ahead of John Pantsil. The club finished the season in ninth place under Eriksson's successor Nigel Pearson.

In July 2012, after the club signed Belgian right-back Ritchie De Laet, Leicester announced that Peltier was not part of Pearson's long-term planning. Former Leicester player Steve Walsh commented his belief that "his better performances came under Sven and I don’t think Nigel saw the best of him", leading to him being made available for a transfer. Despite this, Walsh claimed that Peltier would be a "good signing for any club in this league." Having been made available, Peltier chose to return home from a pre-season training camp in Austria, and this triggered transfer interest from his former club Huddersfield Town and Leeds United. Both clubs were reported to have bid around £600,000 but both were rejected by Leicester City who had set an asking price of £850,000. Leeds later agreed a fee with Leicester for the purchase of Peltier on 3 August.

Peltier joined Leeds United on 4 August 2012, and signed a three-year contract with the club. He became the club's tenth signing of the summer, with manager Neil Warnock making his signing a priority after missing out on his original target Joel Ward. Peltier made his competitive debut for Leeds playing at centre-back in the first game of the season against Shrewsbury Town in the League Cup on 11 August. Peltier was announced as the new Leeds United captain on 18 August, replacing the departed captain Robert Snodgrass. Peltier made his league debut for Leeds in their 1–0 victory against Wolverhampton Wanderers. He became an established first team player in his first season, making 41 league appearances, under managers Neil Warnock, Neil Redfearn and Brian McDermott primarily as a centre-back partnering Tom Lees. Toward the end of the season, he reverted to his usual position at right-back.

After much speculation regarding Peltier's position lf captain, despite captaining Leeds during 2013–14 pre-season and for the opening two games of the season, Peltier was replaced in the role by teammate Rodolph Austin who returned to the side against Leicester City on 11 August 2013. Peltier publicly supported Austin following the announcement, commenting "It was the gaffer’s choice to go with Rudy and I respect that." Peltier scored his first Leeds goal in a 1–1 draw against Blackpool on 26 December 2013 with a looping header.

After falling out of favour under McDermott, on 24 March 2014, Leeds announced that Peltier had signed for Nottingham Forest on loan, however Forest owner Fawaz Al-Hasawi announced the same day that the deal hadn't been completed, leading to confusion over which club Peltier was contracted to. On 27 March 2014, Peltier completed his loan move to Nottingham Forest, only hours after their sacking of Billy Davies as manager. His former Leeds manager Neil Warnock was expected to be announced as Davies' replacement and Peltier had been lined up as the club's first signing under the new manager. However, Warnock's appointment collapsed when he was unable to agree personal terms with the club's hierarchy. Peltier attempted to back out of the move after being informed that Warnock was not going to be appointed and had hoped to join Bolton Wanderers instead, who submitted a late bid to sign him. However, the transfer had already been processed and Peltier eventually completed his move to Forest without Warnock. He was favoured in a central midfield position for Forest under caretaker manager Gary Brazil, making his debut in a 1–1 draw with Ipswich Town on 29 March. With Forest appointing Stuart Pearce as the new manager, Peltier revealed upon his return to Leeds that he wasn't sure what his future would hold. He made seven appearances for Forest without scoring during his loan spell. He later commented that "I didn’t realise how much I wasn’t enjoying my football until I joined them (Forest)", believing that instability over Leeds' ownership under Massimo Cellino had directly affected the player's performances. This included a two-month spell where players were left unpaid.

On 23 June 2014, Peltier left Leeds United, after reaching a mutual agreement with the club to cancel the last year of his contract. Despite interest from Forest, Bolton Wanderers and Blackburn Rovers, on the same day, Peltier rejoined former club Huddersfield Town on a three-year deal. He took the number 37 shirt which he wore during his loan spell at Nottingham Forest at the end of the previous season. On 7 August, he was named as the new club captain by manager Mark Robins, replacing Peter Clarke, who left at the end of the previous season. He made his second debut for the Terriers in their 4–0 defeat by AFC Bournemouth on 9 August. However, following the dismissal of Robins, Peltier fell out of favour under new manager Chris Powell who preferred Tommy Smith. On 16 October, he was relieved of his duties as captain by Powell, being replaced by new signing Mark Hudson. He made only four further appearances under Powell, ending his second spell with Huddersfield having made 12 appearances in all competitions.

On 24 January 2015, Peltier signed for Cardiff City on a deal until the summer of 2018, reuniting with his former Yeovil manager Russell Slade. Signed as a replacement for John Brayford, he made his debut for the club, a week later in a 2–0 loss to Derby County, and went on to help Cardiff push away from a relegation battle and finished mid-table. The following season, Peltier became an ever-present member of the team which had just missed out on a play-off place on the final day against Sheffield Wednesday.

The appointment of Paul Trollope in 2016 as Slade's successor threatened to displace Peltier from the side with the new manager favouring more attack minded full-back Jazz Richards. However, Trollope was sacked after three months in charge and was replaced by Peltier's former Leeds manager Neil Warnock. In February 2017, Peltier underwent an operation on his ankle, which resulted in a long-term absence from the first-team squad. He eventually made his return on 17 April, having missed nearly three months, against Nottingham Forest. Despite an injury-ridden season, he made 28 appearances and was rewarded with a two-year contract extension.

Peltier was part of the side that won promotion to the Premier League during the 2017–18 season, making 30 appearances for the club as they finished as Championship runners-up. In the opening match of the following season, he made his Premier League debut in a 2–0 defeat to AFC Bournemouth. He was dropped from the first team following the match with manager Neil Warnock favouring playing centre-back Bruno Ecuele Manga at right-back, not making a league appearance for over a month when he suffered a shoulder injury during a 5–0 defeat to Manchester City on 22 September.

Peltier is a former youth international player having represented his native England at international level. He was capped at under-18 level three times during his time as a player at hometown club Liverpool but has not been capped at a higher level than under-18s to date.

In 2012, Peltier was approached by the Antigua and Barbuda Football Association to represent the Benna Boys at international level.

Though mainly a right-back, Peltier also plays in the centre-back position. He has said that right-back is his favourite position and has described himself as "a hard working defensive type of player who likes to tackle and pass the ball. I get about the pitch quite well and keep it simple." He does not move up the flanks and shoot crosses; instead he only plays as a defender. Scott Johnson from "WalesOnline" wrote that he "does not fit the modern stereotype of what we now expect from a full-back, as he is not particularly swashbuckling or flashy."

In March 2009, Peltier was shopping with fellow footballer Victor Anichebe in Knutsford when the pair were stopped by police officers after being accused of theft. During the incident, Peltier was handcuffed by officers and Anichebe's crutch was confiscated. The pair were not arrested over the claim and Anichebe received a public apology from the assistant chief constable of the Cheshire Constabulary over the claims. Peltier is close friends with fellow footballer James Vaughan.

Cardiff City

Individual


</doc>
<doc id="4104893" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4104893" title="Joe Bennett">
Joe Bennett

Joe Bennett may refer to:



</doc>
<doc id="24813882" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24813882" title="Sean Morrison">
Sean Morrison

Sean Morrison may refer to:



</doc>
<doc id="18551618" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18551618" title="Bruno Ecuele Manga">
Bruno Ecuele Manga

After beginning his career with FC 105 Libreville in his home country, joined Frenhh side Bordeaux in 2006. He played for the club's reserve side and spent time on loan with lower division side Rodez but only one appearance for the senior side, before being released in 2018. He subsequently joined Ligue 2 side Angers, making more than 50 appearances in two seasons before joining Lorient in 2010 for a fee of €2.5 million. 

He made his Ligue 1 debut with Lorient and went on to make more than 100 appearances in the top tier of French football. He was appointed club captain ahead of the 2012–13 season and remained in the role until 2014 when he signed for Championship side Cardiff City for €5 million. He spent four seasons in the division before helping the club win promotion to the Premier League after finishing as Championship runners-up in the 2017–18 season. 

Manga made his international debut for Gabon in 2006 and has accumulated 67 caps to date, representing the side at four Africa Cup of Nations tournaments. 

Ecuele Manga began his career in his homeland with FC 105 Libreville, before being recommended to French Ligue 1 side Girondins de Bordeaux by Alain Giresse who was manager of the Gabon national team. After being involved in the club's preseason fixtures under manager Laurent Blanc, Ecuele Manga made his competitive debut for Bordeaux, making his first start, in the Matchday Six, in a 3–2 win over Panionios. However, he never played a league game for the club, and spent time on loan at Rodez.

At the end of his contract, he was signed on a free transfer by Angers on a three-year deal, lasting until 2011. There, Ecuele Manga was joined by two Gabonese compatriots, Arsène Do Marcolino and Fabrice Do Marcolino. Ecuele Manga made his Angers' debut in the opening game of the season, in a 0–0 draw against Bastia. He scored his first goal for the club on 24 October 2008, in a 2–0 win over Tours. On 3 March 2009, Ecuele Manga signed a new contract with the club, extending his deal until 2012. This came after a series impressive display at Angers caught attracted attention from several other clubs. In his first season at Angers, Ecuele Manga made thirty appearances, scoring twice.

Ahead of the 2009–10 season, Ecuele Manga was on the verge of joining Rennes in a deal worth €4 million. However, the move never happened. Ecuele Manga was absent at the start of the season and his first appearance came in a 0–0 draw against Strasbourg on 2 October. In his second game of the season against Strasbourg on 5 March 2010, Ecuele Manga scored the first brace of his career, in a 2–1 win. In his second season at Angers, Ecuele Manga made twenty-eight appearances, scoring three times. While at Angers, Ecuele Manga became an integral part of their defence set up, establishing himself in the first team. He later explained his departure from Angers.

During the 2010 summer transfer window, he joined FC Lorient for €2.5 million, and became a first team regular in Ligue 1 as a replacement for Laurent Koscielny who left Lorient for Arsenal.
Ecuele Manga made his Lorient debut in the opening game of the season, making his first start, in a 2–2 draw against Auxerre. Ecuele Manga was soon sidelined after injuring his hamstring in training, an injury that caused him to miss two matches in late-November. His season was further disrupted in mid-February when he injured his thigh. After making his return in a 3–3 draw against Arles-Avignon on 12 March 2011, Ecuele Manga scored his first Lorient goal, in a 3–1 loss against Montpellier on 11 May 2011. In his first season at Lorient, Ecuele Manga scored once in thirty-one appearance for the club.

Ecuele Manga's second season with the club started when he played as center-back in the first-twelve matches (including scoring his first goal of the season against Brest on 29 October 2011) until he was absent through injury and suspension. While on the sidelines, Ecuele Manga signed a new contract with the club, extending his deal until 2015. He made his return in early-December, in a 4–0 loss against Montpellier. On 17 March 2012, Ecuele Manga scored his second goal of the season, in a 2–1 win over Brest. Though scoring twice in thirty-two appearance in his second season, Ecuele Manga's agent announced that Ecuele Manga will stay at the club following a re–ignited interests from clubs around Europe.

At the start of the 2012–13 season, Ecuele Manga was appointed as the new captain of Lorient after replacing Fabien Audard. However, in the opening game of the season in a 2–2 draw against Paris Saint-Germain, Ecuele Manga injured his ligament, and he had to come off, as second half had just started and then it was announced that Ecuele Manga would be out for six months. After a six months absence, he made his return on 26 January 2013, in a 2–1 loss against Nancy. Ecuele Manga then scored his first goal of the season, in the Round of 16 of Coupe de France, in a 3–0 win over Brest. Ecuele Manga's captaincy came into question after Lorient lost 5–0 against Lille on 7 April 2013. In response, he reminded himself to take responsibilities as a captain. With the sideline kept Ecuele Manga for a long time, Ecuele Manga made seventeen appearance and scored once.

In the 2013–14 season, Ecuele Manga continued to remain Lorient captain throughout the season and captained thirty-three matches out of thirty-five appearances he made. Ecuele Manga scored his first goal for the club on 1 March 2014, in a 1–1 draw against Bastia. Ecuele Manga was absence for three matches, due to a knee injury occurring in late-February and a red card in May, which saw him suspended for one match. During the season, Ecuele Manga "won 119 aerial duels more than any other player".

Having received a red card in his second final game for Lorient, Ecuele Manga was suspended for the opening game of the 2014–15 season for Lorient and after making his return, Ecuele Manga captained once in his three appearance by the end of August. After Monaco announced their interest signing Ecuele Manga, Ecuele Manga hinted leaving Lorient, quoting: "I want to see something else, to have other challenges." With a one-year contract left at Lorient, there is slim chance for Ecuele Manga leave at the end of the transfer window.

On 1 September 2014, Bruno Ecuele Manga signed for Welsh club Cardiff City for €5 million, keeping him until 2017.

Ecuele Manga then made his Cardiff City debut, making his first start, in a 1–0 loss against Middlesbrough on 16 September 2014. Ecuele Manga scored his first Cardiff City goal, in a 3–1 win over Leeds United two months later on 1 November 2014. However, Ecuele Manga was on the sideline after injuring his knee during a match against Bolton Wanderers and his international commitment and made his return for his thirteenth start of the season, in a 3–2 loss against Brentford on 20 December 2014.

Ecuele Manga was on the sideline again for his international commitment after being included for the Africa Cup of Nations. Ecuele Manga made his return, on 7 February 2015, in a 1–1 draw against Sheffield Wednesday. Ecuele Manga then scored his second goal of the season, in a 3–1 win over Rotherham United on 3 March 2015 and then his third goal came, a week later on 17 March 2015, in a 1–1 draw against Bournemouth. Ecuele Manga's impressive in his first season led calls for him to be named "Cardiff City's player of the season" by Wales Online.

During the pre-season, Ecuele Manga picked up a knee injury resulting in him missing out on the start of the season. Making his first appearance in the League Cup win over AFC Wimbledon and then being dropped back to the bench for the league games that followed. Whilst on international duty in September, he picked up a groin injury and was ruled out for two months. Ecuele Manga made his return to the first team coming on as a substitute for the injured, Sean Morrison against Birmingham City.
Despite another injury ridden season, Ecuele Manga was offered a new contract by manager, Neil Warnock, which was signed on 27 June 2017. He made a total of 43 appearances as Cardiff finished 2nd in the league, to earn promotion to the Premier League. He scored his only goal of the season in a 4–1 over Mansfield Town in the FA Cup.

Manga scored Cardiff's first goal of 2018–19 season in a 3–1 loss to Norwich City in the Football League Cup.

Born in Libreville, Gabon, Ecuele Manga was called up by Gabon in 2006. In July 2012, Ecuele Manga represented Gabon at the 2012 Olympic Games held in London. However, they were eliminated in the group stage.

Cardiff City

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="24055580" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24055580" title="Jazz Richards">
Jazz Richards

Ashley Darel Jazz Richards (born 12 April 1991) is a Welsh professional footballer who plays as a full-back for Premier League club Cardiff City.

A versatile player who is also capable of playing at left-back and as a midfielder, Richards began his professional career at his hometown club Swansea City, having previously played youth football for their local rivals Cardiff City. He made only 51 appearances for the club in all competitions during a six-year spell with the first team. 

During his time with the "Swans", he spent time on loan with Crystal Palace, Huddersfield Town and Fulham, before joining the latter for an undisclosed fee in 2015. He established himself in Fulham's first team for a brief period. In 2016, he returned to Cardiff City, helping the club win promotion to the Premier League in 2018.

Richards made his full international debut for Wales in 2012, and represented the nation at UEFA Euro 2016. To date, he has won 14 caps for his country.

Born in Swansea, Richards played local football for his schools and local club West End, before joining the Cardiff City Academy. After two seasons, he was released and joined the academy at their South Wales rivals Swansea City at the age of fifteen. Richards initially started out as a midfielder but switched to playing as a defender under manager Roberto Martínez due to the increased competition between midfielders in the first team at the time. He has since continued to play at that position as well. Richards earned £60 a week while on a scholarship with the "Swans".

After spending two seasons with the academy and reserve sides, Richards made his professional debut for Swansea in a Championship match against Middlesbrough during a 3–0 loss on 15 August 2009, replacing Shaun MacDonald as a substitute in the 63rd minute. After Richards made 15 appearances during the 2009–10 season, he signed a new two-year deal with Swansea.

The start of the 2010–11 season saw Richards spend the opening six months as an unused substitute or in the reserve side. He did not make his first appearance of the season until 3 January 2011, during a 2–1 defeat against Leicester City following a defensive injury crisis where several first team players were ruled out. Throughout January and February, Richards was given a handful of first team opportunities. However, he lost his first team place for the remainder of the season following the return of Àngel Rangel from injury. He made eight appearances during the 2010–11 season as Swansea went on to become the first Welsh team ever to gain promotion to the Premier League.

After appearing on the bench for several matches at the start of the following season, Richards made his Premier League debut when he came on as a substitute for Neil Taylor during a 3–1 loss to Norwich City on 15 October 2011. Twelve days later, he was rewarded with a new 18-month contract. He then made his first start for the club in the Premier League, playing in a 4–2 loss against Blackburn Rovers on 3 December 2011. As the 2011–12 season progressed, Richards was sent to play in the reserves for the rest of the season, in order to regain his fitness. He finished the season with eight appearances.

At the start of the 2012–13 season, Richards struggled to break into the first team over Rangel in the right-back position. Because of this, he stated his desire to leave the club on loan to gain experience and compete for his spot in the first team. However, he was forced to wait until the winter transfer window to secure a move. In the first half of the season, he made just four appearances for Swansea, all in cup competitions. At the end of January, he joined Crystal Palace on loan until the end of the season. He made his debut for the club five days later, on 30 January 2013 in a 1–0 loss against Huddersfield Town. In his next match, against Charlton Athletic, Richards assisted Glenn Murray's winning goal, as Palace defeated their South London rivals 2–1. During his loan spell, he signed a new contract with Swansea until June 2016. He went on to make 11 appearances and appeared as an unused substitute in the 2013 Championship play-off final, as Palace beat Watford 1–0 to achieve promotion to the Premier League.

After returning to Swansea, Richards made his first appearance of the 2013–14 season in the second leg of the Europa League qualifiers, a 0–0 draw against Malmö, helping Swansea advance 4–0 on aggregate. On 10 September 2013, Richards joined Championship side Huddersfield Town on a 93-day emergency loan. After not being able to obtain international clearance from FIFA in time to play against Doncaster Rovers on 14 September, he made his Town debut as a substitute in a 2–1 win over Charlton Athletic on 17 September 2013. His loan spell ended on 17 December after just 9 appearances for the Terriers. Following his return from his loan spell, Richards did not appear in another match until 16 February 2014 when he made played in a 3–1 loss against Everton in the last-sixteen of the FA Cup. He made no further appearances during the remainder of the season.

In the 2014–15 season, Richards made his first appearance of the season in the first round of the League Cup, in a 1–0 win over Rotherham United on 26 August 2014. He then made his first Premier League appearance in two years when he came on as a substitute in the 82nd minute of a 0–0 draw against Sunderland on 27 September 2014. Following this, Richards was given a handful of first team appearances throughout 2014 despite struggling to compete with Rangel and suffering his own injury concerns. In a 2–1 loss against Tottenham Hotspur on 14 December 2014, Richards made an error that led to Christian Eriksen scoring the winning goal. After the match, he issued an apology to Swansea City supporters for his error. Despite his apology, he became a victim of abuse on social media website Twitter by Swansea City supporters. Manager Garry Monk backed Richards and picked him in the club's following fixture against Hull City. 

This turned out to be Richards' last season with Swansea. In six years, he made just 51 appearances for the club and never established himself as a regular. Only 18 of his appearances coming in the Premier League. His lone match in the 2013–14 Europa League qualifiers was his only appearance in a European competition for the club.

On 24 January 2015, Richards joined Championship side Fulham on a one-month loan deal. He made his debut for the club on 31 January 2015, starting in a 2–1 loss against Blackburn Rovers. After making five appearances, Richards had his loan spell with Fulham extended until the end of the season. Richards went on to make 14 appearances for the Cottagers, all of which were starts.

On 2 July 2015, Swansea accepted Fulham's bid for Richards to transfer on a permanent deal. He signed a three-year deal with the option of a fourth, for an undisclosed fee. Although his year was marked with injuries, Richards' made 22 appearances in his only season as a permanent player at the club. He established himself as a regular when he was fit. However, ahead of the 2016–17 season, Richards was expected to lose his first team place at Fulham, with manager Slaviša Jokanović preferring Ryan Fredericks in the right-back position. As a result, Fulham accepted a bid from Cardiff City for Richards.

On 19 July 2016, Richards joined Championship club Cardiff City on a three-year-deal in a swap move which saw Scott Malone join Fulham. He made his debut in a goalless draw at Birmingham City, where he became embroiled in controversy after reportedly refusing to do Cardiff's traditional ayatollah gesture, performed by fans of the club, several times at the match. However, the club later released video footage that showed him performing the gesture.

After starting the season as a regular in the first team, Richards suffered a training injury in September that led to him missing three months of the season. His lengthy rehabilitation prompted manager Neil Warnock to quip "I've had lads with broken legs recover quicker than him." He eventually made his return on 2 January, as unused substitute against Aston Villa. He enjoyed an extended run in the first team soon after, playing in ten of the club's following twelve matches, stating that he felt that he had "a lot more to show. I think I'm nowhere near my full potential." In his first season with Cardiff, he appeared in a career high 26 league matches.

At the start of the following season, Richards again suffered an injury blow early in the season, being forced to undergo surgery after hurting his ankle during 2–1 victory over Sunderland on 23 September 2017. He returned from injury in January 2018, playing in five matches before his season was ended by a further injury. He made only eleven appearances in all competitions during the season as Cardiff achieved promotion after finishing as runners-up.

Richards represented the Wales under-17 and under-19 sides. He was called up to the under-21 squad for the first time in March 2009 to face Luxembourg. He won ten or more caps at all three levels during his youth career.

On 27 May 2012, he gained his first full international cap for Wales in their 2–0 friendly loss to Mexico in New Jersey, replacing Neil Taylor for the last ten minutes of the match. Wales qualified for Euro 2016 and Richards was called up into the final 23-man squad. He played his only game in the tournament as a late substitute in the team's first match, a 2–1 victory over Slovakia.
Wales went on to reach the semi-finals before losing to Portugal. As of October 2018, Richards has had 14 international caps with Wales, including seven appearances in the starting lineup. He played in four matches in Euro 2016 qualifying and three in 2018 World Cup qualifying.

Richards' comes from a family with a sporting background as his cousins Eli Walker and Tobias Webb are also professional athletes. Walker is a rugby union player while Webb is a super-middleweight champion boxer.



</doc>
<doc id="13436010" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13436010" title="Harry Arter">
Harry Arter

Harry Nicholas Arter (born 28 December 1989) is a professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Premier League club Cardiff City, on loan from AFC Bournemouth, and the Republic of Ireland national team.

He began his career at Charlton Athletic, progressing through the club's youth academy before making his professional debut in 2007. He was loaned to non-league sides Staines Town and Welling United before being released, subsequently joining Woking. After one season at Woking, he returned to The Football League with Bournemouth, becoming a first team regular following a loan to Carlisle United in 2011. He contributed to Bournemouth's promotion to the Championship in 2013, and to the Premier League two years later.

Born and raised in England, Arter represents the Republic of Ireland internationally. He played for the nation at under-17 and under-19 level, and made his senior debut in June 2015.

Born in Sidcup, in the London borough of Bexley, to parents Terry and Linda Arter, he was raised in the nearby area of Eltham. He has three brothers, Benji, Daniel and Paddy and a sister, Carly.

He began his career with Charlton Athletic, joining the club's youth system at the age of seven. Turning down offers from other clubs to remain with Charlton, he made his professional debut, and only appearance for the club, on 25 September 2007 in the third round of the League Cup, away to Luton Town. He came on as an 86th-minute substitute for Svetoslav Todorov as Charlton lost 3–1 after extra time. Soon after, he was diagnosed with chronic tendonitis in his achilles which eventually ruptured, leading to almost a year out of action. On his return to fitness, he struggled to break into the first team under new manager Phil Parkinson. In the 2008–09 season, Arter immediately clashed with Parkinson, accusing the manager of "belittling" him by sending him for a trial with non-league side Staines Town prior to a short loan spell.

He later had a loan spell with Welling United as Charlton suffered relegation to League One and Arter was subsequently released by Parkinson as part of an effort to reduce costs at the club. Arter later expressed his disappointment with the decision, stating "The money I was asking for [...] was nothing. I would have taken anything to stay at the time, so it wasn’t down to finance, it was him (Parkinson) not liking me as a footballer." Despite his release, he was allowed to train with Charlton's youth team by coach Steve Avory who had worked with Arter for several years in his youth career. Arter later undertook unsuccessful trials with Gillingham and Ipswich Town and even offered to remain with Charlton without pay but was rejected by Parkinson.

On 2 June 2009, Arter joined Woking on a one-year contract along with his former Charlton teammate Aswad Thomas, after being recommended by assistant manager Jimmy Dack who had worked with Arter previously at Welling. Arter had been waiting for a firm offer to join AFC Wimbledon but accepted Woking's offer after Wimbledon failed to call back. He made his debut for the club in the opening day of the 2009–10 season, during a 2–1 victory over his former side Welling United. On 24 October 2009, Arter scored a hat-trick for the club during a 5–0 win over Hendon in the FA Cup.

At the end of the 2009–10 season, it was well documented that Arter would be leaving Woking, with several Football League clubs chasing Arter. Woking's website soon confirmed that Arter had agreed to sign for AFC Bournemouth with the fee to be decided by an FA tribunal, as the two clubs could not agree a transfer fee, with Woking hoping to receive around £30,000 for the move after rejecting Bournemouth's initial £2,000 offer. Arter later described how he had planned to give up football if his season with Woking had failed.

On 7 June 2010, Arter joined League One club Bournemouth for an undisclosed fee, later stated as £4,000, signed by Eddie Howe. The club had moved to sign Arter after impressing assistant manager Jason Tindall during a scouting assignment, with a previous transfer embargo having been recently lifted. Two months later, after impressing during the club's preseason fixtures, he made his debut in their first match of the season, away to his former team Charlton. He was booked in the first half for a foul on Akpo Sodje and substituted at half time for Michael Symes as Bournemouth lost 1–0. He was subsequently dropped from the first team, not making another start in the league for Bournemouth until November, having also been hampered by a hernia. The hernia eventually required surgery, resulting in Arter being ruled out for a month.

Having fallen out of favour under new manager Lee Bradbury, despite being handed a new three-year contract following his appointment, on 4 March 2011, Arter went on a one-month loan to fellow League One team Carlisle United in order to gain first team experience. The next day he made his debut for the club, replacing Liam Noble for the last 30 minutes away to Brighton & Hove Albion. He scored an extra-time equaliser, the first of his professional career, but a minute later Liam Bridcutt scored Brighton's winner in a 4–3 victory. He made four further appearances for the club during his loan spell before returning to Bournemouth.

The sales of Danny Hollands and Anton Robinson during the 2011 summer transfer window allowed Arter to gain increased first team experience with Bournemouth. On 13 August 2011, Arter replaced Mark Molesley in the 66th minute of a game against Sheffield Wednesday at Dean Court, and 17 minutes later confirmed a 2–0 win with his first goal for the club, going on to score in his two following appearances, a 3–1 defeat to Stevenage and a 2–1 victory over his former side Carlisle. His performances attracted the attention of several Championship clubs and Bournemouth rejected enquiries from two clubs, before handing him an improved contract.

However, despite an upturn in form, Arter suffered from a poor disciplinary record, serving a one-match suspension after collecting five bookings within the first two months of the season and accumulating nine bookings by November. His tally was the worst in League One and led him to seek advice from a sports psychologist in order to control his anger, with the majority of his bookings being due to dissent towards match officials. He eventually received a two-match ban for receiving his tenth booking of the season a month later and a further three-match ban later in the season for his fifteenth booking. After Bradbury was dismissed and replaced by former youth team manager Paul Groves, Arter stated that he hoped to be used in a more attacking role after claiming that Bradbury had played him "too defensively." Overall, he scored 5 goals in 34 league matches during the season as Bournemouth finished in 11th place.

On 25 August 2012, in his fourth appearance of the 2012–13 season Arter was sent off after 26 minutes of Bournemouth's 1–1 draw at Preston North End for two bookable offences. Following the dismissal, he issued a public apology for the sending off and blamed his "immaturity." Manager Groves held talks with Arter in an attempt to curb his disciplinary problems, and, despite accepting his behaviour, Arter also claimed that he was being unfairly treated by referees due to his reputation, commenting "I feel I am being highlighted before a game. [...] I have earned that reputation so it is my fault. But, in another way, it is unfair on me."

On 20 October 2012, in Eddie Howe's first match back in charge following his reappointment as manager, Arter scored in a 3–1 home win over Tranmere Rovers. One of Howe's first decisions on his return was to sign Arter to an extended contract, set to run until 2015 with Bournemouth retaining the option for a further year. Following Howe's return, Arter became a key figure in the side as the club embarked on a fifteen match unbeaten run that moved them into promotion contention, eventually losing 1–0 to Walsall in January 2013. Despite receiving a two-match ban for accumulating ten bookings for the second consecutive season, manager Howe praised Arter and stated his belief that he had "matured" as a player and his bookings were largely due to his combative nature on the field rather than dissent.

Altogether, he scored 8 goals in 37 league matches, including in a 3–1 win in the penultimate game of the season against Carlisle on 20 April 2013, which secured Bournemouth promotion to the Championship. Arter described his goal as "the most important goal I have ever scored and one that will probably stick with me for the rest of my life."

Following Bournemouth's promotion to the Championship, they began their campaign against Arter's former side Charlton for the third time in four seasons, winning 2–1 on the opening day of the season as Arter recorded a victory over his former side for the first time in his career. Having featured regularly during the first month of the season, he was ruled out until October through injury before making his return in a 5–2 victory over Millwall where he scored his first goal in the second tier.

Arter's season ended on 5 April 2014 when he received a straight red card following a foul on Junior Hoilett during a 2–1 victory over Queens Park Rangers, gaining a three-match ban. He helped the side to a tenth placed finish in their first season in the Championship, the highest placed finish and points total in the club's history, and credited Howe with bringing the best out of the club's players and improving his own game in "leaps and bounds".

Despite their record finish, Arter was keen to push for promotion at the start of the 2014–15 season and claimed he would see the season as a failure if the club did not at least reach the playoffs. On 25 October 2014, Arter played as Bournemouth beat Birmingham City 8–0 away to set a club record win. Throughout the season Arter and midfielder Andrew Surman formed a strong partnership, with Arter more the attacking and Surman the more defensive of the two, with Arter praising his midfield teammate – describing him as "He’s a top player and one we’re fortunate to have." Arter was named the Professional Footballers' Association (PFA) Player of the Month award for December 2014, after scoring in all five matches he played during the month but lost out to Ipswich Town forward Daryl Murphy in the Football League equivalent. He was rewarded for his form by signing an improved three and a half year contract with the club.

Arter became known for his left footed strikes from range, notably scoring the second goal in the 3–0 home victory over promotion rivals Middlesbrough and first goal in the 1–1 away draw against second placed Watford. On 27 April 2015, Arter played in the 3–0 home victory against Bolton Wanderers, the win all but sealed Bournemouth's promotion to the Premier League. Five days later, he scored the second goal in the 3–0 away win against his former club Charlton, the win fully sealed promotion and, thanks to Watford drawing their last match in injury time, the Championship title. This was the first time Bournemouth had been promoted into England's top flight in the club's 125-year history.

Arter was one of Bournemouth's prominent players in the season, contributing 9 goals from 43 matches, and subsequently was voted Supporters' Player of the Season and named PFA Championship Player of the Season.

Following the end of their Championship winning season, Arter sustained a groin injury while on international duty that made him a major doubt for the club's opening fixtures in the Premier League. After being advised to rest for several weeks, Arter was hopeful of returning in time, but was eventually forced to undergo surgery on the problem after visiting a specialist in Germany. He eventually made his first team return on 28 October 2015, playing in the club's 1–0 defeat to Liverpool in the League Cup. He made his Premier League debut four days later, on 1 November 2015, as he played 73 minutes in a 2–0 defeat to Southampton, and his return was credited with helping the club achieve an upturn in fortunes.

On 12 December 2015, Arter played in a 2–1 victory over Manchester United, just days after his wife had given birth to their still born daughter. Despite his grief, he met with manager Howe prior to the match, telling him "I’m training today and playing tomorrow if you want to select me. I want to play so bad." He later admitted that he was in a "bad way" mentally before the game and wept in the changing room toilets prior to kick-off. He produced a performance that saw him named man of the match afterwards, being substituted in the final stages of the game after being overcome with emotion and embracing Howe on the touchline. After the match, Howe praised Arter, stating that he had "real strength to keep his emotions in check." Arter was also given a standing ovation by his Bournemouth teammates in the dressing room.

Further injury problems restricted Arter's appearances, suffering from a persistent achilles issue, and he appeared in just four matches in the final three months of the season. He attempted to play on with the injury but struggled to maintain fitness and admitted that he had returned to action too early. In his first season in the first tier, he appeared in 21 league matches for the club as they finished in 16th position.

Prior to the start of the 2016–17 season, Arter signed a new three-year deal with Bournemouth, set to run until 2019, and called on the squad to aim to improve on the previous season and not simply target avoiding relegation. After suffering a 3–1 defeat to Manchester United in the opening game, Arter was sent off in the following match, a 1–0 defeat to West Ham United, after receiving a second yellow card for fouling Cheikhou Kouyate. His first yellow was received for dissent after Premier League officials announced stricter rules on any show of disrespect towards match officials. Despite his sending off, Arter stated "The manager has said if I change the way I play then I become a different player. I just need to cut out those silly bookings chatting back to referees."

He started Bournemouth's first 21 league games of the season and earned praise for his firm but was dropped from the side for a match against Watford in January 2017. He stated that he "hated" being left out of the squad but was restored to the starting line-up for the following match, scoring his first goal of the season in a 6–3 defeat to Everton. Arter made 35 appearances for Bournemouth during the 2016–17 season, being rewarded with a new three-year contract set to run until 2021 at the end of the year. Manager Howe praised Arter for improving his disciplinary record, stating that, although he "still had that fiery streak," he had "matured" as a player.

During pre-season for the 2017–18 season, Arter was monitored by Bournemouth over fitness concerns after playing the majority of the previous season with an achilles injury. On 19 August 2017, Arter received media attention after controversially tricking Nathaniel Chalobah into leaving a free shot on goal by pretending to be one of Chalobah's teammates in a 2–0 home defeat to Watford. Having started all of his club's opening five matches, he suffered an injury and after returning to the squad following an international break he was unable to regain his first team place. He made 13 appearances over the course of the season, his final start coming during a 2–2 draw with Brighton & Hove Albion on New Year's Day. Despite his lack of playing time, manager Howe stated that Arter was not for sale after he was heavily linked with a transfer to rival Premier League side West Ham United, with Arter declaring he was "100% committed" to Bournemouth.

Despite stating his desire to remain with Bournemouth in an attempt to force his way back into the first team, on 9 August 2018, Arter joined newly promoted Premier League side Cardiff City on loan for the 2018–19 season, rejecting a similar offer from Watford. Bournemouth manager Howe admitted that he had taken the decision "reluctantly" as Arter was determined to play first team football. After being ineligible to play against his parent club Bournemouth on the opening day of the season, Arter made his debut for Cardiff in a 0–0 draw with Newcastle United on 18 August 2018. His early performances for the club earned praise from Cardiff manager Neil Warnock who described Arter's contribution as "vital".

Arter played for the Republic of Ireland under-15, under-17 and under-19 teams, being eligible through his Sligo-born grandparents.

In February 2015, Republic of Ireland manager Martin O'Neill said that Arter was on his radar and could be called up to the squad for the UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying game against Poland. He earned his first call-up for that game on 12 March, following what O'Neill described as a "very good season", but did not play in it. He made his senior debut on 7 June 2015, as a 63rd-minute substitute for Glenn Whelan in a 0–0 draw in a friendly against England at the Aviva Stadium. He made his full international debut against the Netherlands in a 1–1 draw in Dublin on 27 May 2016, in which he was awarded man of the match. However, he was later ruled out of Ireland's squad for UEFA Euro 2016 due to injury. Arter made his senior competitive debut for the Republic of Ireland in a 1–0 away win over Austria on 12 November 2016 in a World Cup qualifying game.

In September 2018, Arter made himself unavailable for selection for two matches after a clash with assistant manager Roy Keane. After sitting out training on medical advice, Arter was confronted by Keane which led to Arter walking out of the team training session.
Arter returned to the Republic of Ireland team for the UEFA Nations League game against Denmark on 13 October 2018.

Arter is the brother-in-law of former England captain Scott Parker, who is married to Arter's sister Carly. They both began their careers at Charlton. Arter has frequently cited Parker as a positive influence in his life. When Arter was released by Charlton and struggled to find a new club, Parker let him live in his house and paid him to do oddjobs in order to earn money.

In December 2015, Harry Arter and his partner, Rachel, suffered a family tragedy when their daughter died at birth. Bournemouth manager Eddie Howe paid tribute to Arter following a 2–1 win over Manchester United on 12 December. Howe dedicated the win to Arter and said it had been "a hugely emotional week for him." In October 2016, Arter shared the news of his partner being pregnant again. On 17 February 2017, she gave birth to a baby girl, and called her Raine.

Bournemouth




</doc>
<doc id="33264600" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33264600" title="Joe Ralls">
Joe Ralls

Joseph William Ralls (born 13 October 1993) is an English professional footballer who plays for Premier League club Cardiff City as a midfielder. After playing at youth level for local teams Aldershot Town and Farnborough, Ralls joined the youth academy at Cardiff City after being spotted by scouts from the club. He made his professional debut for the "Bluebirds" in August 2011 before joining Yeovil Town on a season-long loan deal for the 2013–14 season to gain experience. On his return to Cardiff, Ralls established himself in the first-team and has made over 200 appearances for the club in all competitions.

Ralls began his career at Aldershot Town, where he played one game for the first-team in an Aldershot Senior Cup tie against Bagshot at the age of just 15 after a number of senior players were rested, before joining Farnborough under-16s. After he was spotted by Cardiff City scouts along with Jordan Carter, a small compensation was paid by Cardiff to sign the two players. He had previously agreed to play in a trial match for Premier League club Fulham, although this was postponed before he joined Cardiff. He also attracted interest from Everton and Notts County. Then Cardiff academy manager Neal Ardley has stated that he had to convince other staff at the club about Ralls after he declared his intention to offer him a contract. Following his departure from the club, Farnborough youth coach Aidan Whelan commented "We realised from when he first joined us that he has a real talent. He was head and shoulders above players at the same age level".

After Cardiff were left with a depleted squad due to international call-ups prior to a Football League Cup tie against Oxford United on 10 August 2011, manager Malky Mackay approached Ardley to enquire which players in the academy set-up would be ready to step into the first-team for the match. Ardley recommended Ralls, Deji Oshilaja and Mamadou Diallo to Mackay and Ralls and Oshilaja were eventually named on the substitutes bench for the match. Mackay later revealed that he knew very little about Ralls prior to his inclusion in the match. Ralls was brought on after 67 minutes in place of Andrew Taylor to make his professional debut at the age of 17 as Cardiff went on to win 3–1 in extra-time. He was handed his first start in the second round of the competition against Huddersfield Town 13 days later, playing 81 minutes before being replaced by Peter Whittingham.

His progression into the first-team saw him handed his first professional contract by the club on 30 September 2011, later commenting "It's a fantastic feeling to have signed professionally with a club like Cardiff City". Ralls made his league debut just 48 hours after signing the contract, being brought on after just 10 minutes of a match against Hull City following an injury to forward Kenny Miller, scoring a stunning volley for his first senior goal as Cardiff went on to lose 2–1. His first league start came on 10 December in a goalless draw at Millwall, going on to finish his first season in the first-team squad having made 14 appearances in all competitions.<ref name="Games played by Joe Ralls in 2011/2012"></ref>

Following Cardiff's promotion to the Premier League at the end of the 2012–13 season, Ralls was made available for loan due to the lack of first-team opportunities available in the top tier, joining newly promoted Championship club Yeovil Town on loan on 14 August until January 2014 to gain experience. He made his debut for the club on 17 August after coming on as a substitute in place of Kevin Dawson during a 2–0 defeat to Burnley. He scored his first goal for the "Glovers" in his fourth appearance for the club on 14 September, netting his team's only goal in a 1–1 draw with Sheffield Wednesday, the first goal the team had scored since Ed Upson's winning goal on the opening day of the season a month previously.

Ralls expressed his satisfaction with joining the "Glovers", stating "Yeovil has worked out really well and I know I’ll improve my game here before I return to Cardiff.” He briefly returned to Cardiff following the expiration of his loan deal following the appointment of Ole Gunnar Solskjær as Cardiff manager in order for the Norwegian to assess his squad, missing Yeovil's FA Cup victory over Leyton Orient. However, with Yeovil keen on extending the loan deal, on 11 January 2014, Ralls agreed an extension to his loan with Yeovil until the end of the season.

His performances during his loan spell with Yeovil saw Cardiff manager Solskjær to offer Ralls a three-year extension to his contract at the Cardiff City Stadium on his return to the club and was awarded the man of the match award in his first appearance of the 2014–15 season, during a 2–1 victory over Coventry City in the first round of the Football League Cup. Despite the departure of Solskjær soon after, Ralls continued to thrive under newly appointed Cardiff boss Russell Slade, becoming a regular in the first team during the 2014–15 season, playing mostly as a left-sided midfielder due to intense competition for places in the centre of midfield from Peter Whittingham and Aron Gunnarsson, altogether playing 31 games and scoring 4 goals, before being handed a new five-year contract with the club set to run until 2020, to which manager Slade stated that he was "delighted" to keep Ralls at the club.

At the start of the following season, he was handed the number 8 shirt and started in the left-sided midfield role against Fulham on the opening day. Ralls scored his only goal of the campaign in January against Wolverhampton Wanderers in a 3–1 win. Ralls effort throughout the season had earned him the Young Player of the year award, whilst Cardiff just missed out on a play-off place to Sheffield Wednesday.

Ralls celebrated his 100th appearance for Cardiff, by scoring a spectacular goal from 25 yards out against Fulham in August, also opening his accounts for the 2016–17 season. He was nominated for Player of the Month in January, following impressive performances scoring two against Aston Villa and Reading and seeing Cardiff rise from the relegation battle to mid-table spot.

Ralls received his first international call for the England Under-19s to replace the injured Robert Hall to play Czech Republic in February 2012. Ralls came on in the games to make his English debut.

Primarily a central midfield player, Ralls featured frequently at left midfield and left back during the early stages of his career at Cardiff and Yeovil, commenting that, although not a natural in either position, he can "do a job there" but admitted that he does "naturally tend to drift inside" when playing out of position. Ralls has described himself as a box-to-box midfielder that "likes to get forward as much as possible".

Cardiff City

Individual


</doc>
<doc id="10846499" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10846499" title="Danny Ward">
Danny Ward

Danny Ward (born ), also known by the nickname of "Wardy", is the head coach of the London Broncos in the Super League, and an English former professional rugby league footballer who played in the 1990s, 2000s and 2010s. At international level, he played for Great Britain, and at club level for the Leeds Rhinos, Castleford Tigers, Hull Kingston Rovers and in the Super League.

Ward was previously Andrew Henderson's assistant coach at the London Broncos, and had held this position since 2015. Prior to this, he was head coach of the Under-19s.

Ward was born in Dewsbury, West Yorkshire, England.

Ward is the son of former Leeds captain and coach David Ward. He was signed for Leeds from Dewsbury Moor, and he made his début as a substitute against Sheffield Eagles in 1999. He was named the Leeds Alliance Player of the Year in 2000, before becoming a regular first team member the following season.

Ward first played at international level for the Great Britain Academy before being selected for John Kear's England Under-21 squad for the tour of South Africa at the end of the 2001 season. England won the First Test 112–6 in the first test and the second 74–14. In 2002 he was selected in the England 'A' squad to play New Zealand at Griffin Park, losing 12–34. He then was part of the squad to tour Fiji and Tonga. One of his highlights in 2002 was a drop goal in a victory at the Boulevard on his 21st birthday.

Ward emulated his father by playing in the Challenge Cup Final in 2003. In 2004 he made 14 first team starts and 12 substitute appearances, and scored a try in the 46–28 win over Wakefield. Ward played for the Leeds Rhinos at in their 2004 Super League Grand Final victory against the Bradford Bulls. In 2004 Ward made the transition into the senior Great Britain team making his début as a substitute against New Zealand in the Tri Nations competition.

As Super League IX champions, the Rhinos faced 2004 NRL season premiers, the Bulldogs in the 2005 World Club Challenge. Ward played as a in Leeds' 39–32 victory. In his final season with Leeds, Ward scored a try in the 2005 Challenge Cup Final against Hull and in the Grand Final qualifying win at St. Helens that took the Rhinos back to Old Trafford for the Grand Final. He played for the Rhinos at in their 2005 Super League Grand Final loss against Bradford Bulls. He left Leeds before the 2006 Super League season to join Castleford.

At the beginning of the 2006's Super League XI, Ward was released after an unsavoury incident. He joined the Castleford Tigers, who had just been promoted from National League One. Ward adapted well to his new surroundings and one of his highlights that year was a try in the 31–30 victory over his former employers at the Jungle. However, his efforts were not enough to save Castleford from relegation.

For the 2007 season, he like Luke Dyer, a teammate of his at Castleford, moved east to pastures new at Craven Park with Hull Kingston Rovers. So far, Ward has yet to make the impact that he did at both Leeds and Castleford, but his presence presents a danger to any defence in the whole of Super League.

He was released from Hull KR on 17 September 2007. He signed a two-year deal with Harlequins starting from the 2008 season.

Ward was the head coach of the London Broncos Under-19s for the 2014 and 2015 seasons. He was currently the assistant coach in 2015 and 2017.

He was promoted to head coach from the beginning of the 2018 season. Ward took charge of his first professional game with a 56-12 victory over the Barrow Raiders.




</doc>
<doc id="26056248" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26056248" title="Kenneth Zohore">
Kenneth Zohore

Albin Kenneth Dahrup Zohore (born 31 January 1994) is a Danish professional footballer who plays as a striker for Premier League club Cardiff City.

He began his career in his native Denmark, making his professional debut for Copenhagen at the age of 16, becoming the youngest player to play in the Danish Superliga. Regarded as a promising youngster, he joined Italian side Fiorentina in 2012 but struggled to break into the first-team and, following loan spells with Brøndby IF and IFK Göteborg, he returned to Denmark on a permanent basis by joining OB in 2015.

Zohore was born in Copenhagen to a Danish mother and an Ivorian father. His father is the second cousin of former Chelsea striker Didier Drogba.

After spells with BK Skjold and KB, Zohore joined the youth system at Copenhagen, being promoted to the under-19 squad at the age of 15 in 2009. He joined the first-team's training camp in Marbella, Spain, on 2 February 2010 together with Thobias Skovgaard. He made his professional debut for the club on 7 March 2010, at the age of 16 years and 35 days old, becoming the youngest player to ever make his debut in the Danish Superliga after replacing César Santin in the 73rd minute during a 5–0 victory against AGF. However, the match was his only appearance for the first-team during the 2009–10 season.

On 20 October 2010, Zohore made his first UEFA Champions League appearance for Copenhagen, playing against FC Barcelona at Camp Nou. The 16-year-old striker replaced César Santin in the 74th minute of the game, becoming one of the youngest players ever to play in the Champion's League. Ten days later, he scored his first senior goal for FC Copenhagen in the Danish Superliga against Lyngby Boldklub. He is the second youngest goalscorer ever in the Danish Superliga, after Mads Beierholm.

Zohore attracted attention from numerous clubs around Europe, spending time on trial at Chelsea, also being approached by Chelsea player Didier Drogba after the two sides met in a Champions League fixture, and Inter Milan. His performances saw him described as "one of the top striking prospects anywhere in the world".

On 31 January 2012, FC Copenhagen announced that Zohore had signed for Italian side ACF Fiorentina on his 18th birthday for a fee in the region of £1 million. He was given shirt no. 33. However, Zohore never featured for the first team, later stating that he was "too young" to cope with the strong competition for places.

On 8 August 2013, Brøndby IF, managed by Zohore's former coach at Danish youth levels Thomas Frank, announced that they had agreed a deal with ACF Fiorentina to sign Zohore on a season-long loan with the option to buy at the end of the year for between €2.2 and €2.3 million. Brøndby paid a loan fee of nearly €100,000 to secure the move, beating off competition from German side Hannover 96, however the transfer nearly collapsed close to completion as Brøndby were unaware of their need to pay Zohore's wages during the loan spell but the loan was eventually completed. Brøndby were hopeful of completing the transfer on a permanent basis but were unable to meet Fiorentina's valuation.

On 11 August 2014 IFK Göteborg announced that Zohore had joined the club on a loan deal from Fiorentina. He made his debut 13 August 2014 in an away game against Åtvidaberg BK coming on as a substitute. In his home game debut against Brommapojkarna, 17 August 2014, Zohore scored his first goal for IFK Göteborg when he only had been on the pitch three minutes after coming on as a substitute in the 83rd minute.

On 3 February 2015, Zohore returned to the Danish Superliga with Odense Boldklub, following the termination of his contract with Fiorentina.

On the final day of the winter transfer window in January 2016, Zohore joined Championship side Cardiff City on loan from Belgian side K.V. Kortrijk, a club also owned by Cardiff chairman Vincent Tan, who signed him that same day from OB for a fee reported to be around £1 million. At the time, Cardiff were under a transfer ban following a breach of financial fair play rules and were banned from signing players on permanent contracts, although club sources stated that the deal was not made to circumvent the transfer ban and that he was moving to Cardiff to "boost his experience". He made his debut on 6 February in a goalless draw against Milton Keynes Dons, coming on as a substitute in place of Sammy Ameobi. He featured frequently in the final months of the 2015–16 season as a substitute, scoring his first goal for the club on 19 April 2016 during a 2–1 defeat against Brentford. He was rewarded with his first start for the club in the following match, a 2–1 victory over Bolton Wanderers, during which he scored Cardiff's opening goal. He finished his loan spell having made 12 appearances, scoring twice.

Zohore went on to sign a three-year deal in the Welsh capital in June 2016 for an undisclosed fee. However, new manager Paul Trollope, who had replaced Russell Slade following the end of the previous season, favoured fellow new signings Frederic Gounongbe and Rickie Lambert following his appointment with Zohore making only one start in the opening four months of the season, during a 1–0 defeat to Bristol Rovers in the first round of the League Cup on 11 August 2016. With the club struggling, Trollope was replaced by Neil Warnock and, in December 2016, Zohore impressed as a half time substitute during a 2–1 victory against Wolverhampton Wanderers. Following the match, Warnock praised Zohore's performances in his first two appearances under him, commenting that Zohore had been "a little lazy" during his time at Cardiff and that a transfer away from the club had been considered, but that his improvement meant that he could not "buy anybody better than him at the minute". He went onto score his first goal on Boxing Day during a 2–2 draw with Brentford. Zohore was nominated for Championship Player of the Month in February, following a goal against Leeds United and braces against Rotherham United and Fulham, but missed out to Leeds' Chris Wood. His 12 goals for Cardiff saw him as the top goalscorer for the season, and he was awarded a contract keeping him at the club until 2020. At the end of the season, he was awarded the club's Young Player of the Year award.

Zohore's form at the end of the previous season attracted interest from several clubs with Hull City, with an original bid of £6 million, and Brighton & Hove Albion both having bids rejected by Cardiff. Manager Neil Warnock later commented that Zohore was not for sale and would only leave the club if "I have a heart attack and another manager takes over." Zohore scored his first goal of the season in the opening match, the only goal of the game in a 1–0 victory over Burton Albion on 5 August 2017. Following a nine-game goal drought, Zohore scored a brace against Leeds United on 26 September, in a 3–1 win, before suffering an ankle injury which kept him out until the Christmas Period. He returned to the side, replacing Omar Bogle in a 2–0 defeat at Bolton Wanderers on 23 December, before scoring his fourth of the season against Fulham on Boxing Day. The new year saw Zohore score 5 goals, including winners against Bristol City and Ipswich Town. Cardiff finished in 2nd place, gaining promotion to the Premier League.

Zohore started the 2018–19 season as Cardiff's lead striker against Bournemouth, however, a string of injuries and bad form saw Zohore in and out of the squad. He scored his first Premier League goal, in a 2–1 win at Southampton on 9 February.

In May 2018 he was named in Denmark’s preliminary 35-man squad for the 2018 World Cup in Russia. However, he did not make the final 23.


Copenhagen

Cardiff City



</doc>
<doc id="40621885" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40621885" title="Josh Murphy">
Josh Murphy

Joshua Murphy (born 24 February 1995) is an English professional footballer who plays as a winger for Premier League club Cardiff City. He scored on his professional debut in a League Cup match against Watford. He is the twin brother of professional footballer Jacob Murphy.

Murphy, along with his twin brother, Jacob, first played football together from the age of seven and eventually, they both joined Norwich City as an under-12 in 2006. It was announced on 31 March 2011, that Josh and his twin brother Jacob joined the club's academy ahead of a new season.

Murphy's first involvement in the Norwich first-team came on 26 September 2012 when he was named as an unused substitute in the club's 1–0 Football League Cup victory over Doncaster Rovers. He was a part of the Norwich City youth team who won the 2012–13 FA Youth Cup where he scored in the final against Chelsea. Murphy signed his first professional contract for Norwich City alongside his twin brother Jacob on 4 January 2013.

He made his professional debut on 24 September 2013, replacing Bradley Johnson in the 67th minute of Norwich's Football League Cup match against Watford, with Norwich 2–0 down. He scored his first professional goal in the 77th minute to pull the score back to 2–1. Norwich eventually went on to win 3–2 in extra time. He made his league debut on 2 November 2013 as a half-time substitute for Steven Whittaker in Norwich's 7–0 league defeat against Manchester City. Then, in December 2013, both Josh and Jacob both signed a three year contract with the club.

His first senior start was in the FA Cup for Norwich City against Fulham. He set up the first goal and was eventually substituted for his brother Jacob Murphy. In 2014, Josh was awarded Professional of the Year in the West Norfolk Sports Awards, as well as the special achievement award. Soon under management of Neil Adams, Josh had a long run in the first team, making appearance for Norwich City.

Following Norwich City's relegation to the Championship, Murphy made his first start of the 2014–15 season, where he played 90 minutes and scored twice, which his twin brother Jacob provided one of the two goals Josh scored, in a 3–1 win over Crawley Town in the second round of the League Cup. Murphy's first league goal game in a 3–1 win for Norwich over Blackpool on 27 September 2014.

With his first team opportunities limited, Murphy joined Championship club Wigan Athletic on a month's loan. Murphy made his Wigan Athletic debut, coming on as a substitute for Jermaine Pennant in the 55th minutes, in a 2–0 loss against Watford on 17 March 2015. Murphy's five appearance at Wigan Athletic soon earned a loan extension until the end of the season. However, Murphy was unable to help Wigan Athletic survive relegation and returned to his parent club.

On 21 August 2015, Murphy joined Championship club Milton Keynes Dons on a season-long loan. He scored the winning goal on his debut in a 2–1 win over Cardiff City in the League Cup 2nd Round. On 26 September 2015, Murphy scored his first league goal in the 1–3 home defeat to Derby County.

On 3 May 2016, Murphy was named Milton Keynes Dons Players' Player of the Year 2015–16. In total, Murphy made 46 appearances for the club, scoring 7 goals in all competitions. Murphy finished the season as the Dons' joint top goalscorer and achieved the most assists.

On 12 June 2018, Murphy joined Premier League side Cardiff City on a 4-year contract for an undisclosed fee, believed to be around £11 million. He made his debut for the club on the opening day of the 2018–19 season as a substitute in place of Nathaniel Mendez-Laing during a 2–0 defeat to AFC Bournemouth. Following a short spell on the sidelines, Murphy scored his first Cardiff goal against Burnley, followed by his second in 4–2 win over Fulham.

Both Josh and Jacob were called up by the England U18 in October 2012 and made their U18's debut in a 1–0 win over Finland U19 on 13 November 2012.

Then in early 2013, Both Josh and Jacob were called up by England U19 and their U19's debut in a 3–1 win over Denmark U19. Then on 14 November 2013, Josh scored his first England U19 goal in a 4–1 win over Hungary U19.

In late 2014, Jacob was called by England U20 and scored on his debut on 5 September 2014, in a 6–0 win over Romania U20.

Murphy was born in Wembley, London. 

The twins spoke about their close bonds and being there for each other. Their parents and younger brother live in Downham Market and run the Arbuckles restaurant.

While on the pitch, former manager Chris Hughton instructed the twins to wear different coloured boots so that he could tell them apart. His uncle is former Ipswich Town footballer Tommy Parkin.




</doc>
<doc id="14576175" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14576175" title="Alex Smithies">
Alex Smithies

Alexander Smithies (born 5 March 1990) is an English professional footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for club Cardiff City. Smithies is a product of the Huddersfield Town academy who first came into prominence during the 2007–08 season. He joined Queens Park Rangers in 2015 where he played for three years before joining Cardiff City.

Smithies was born in Huddersfield, West Yorkshire. He grew up in Golcar, in the Colne Valley area of Huddersfield. He attended Colne Valley High School, Linthwaite. He grew up supporting Huddersfield Town. Smithies previously played football for Westend Juniors in Huddersfield's local leagues, and he joined the Huddersfield Town academy at the age of 8.

Having come through the Academy of the club he grew up supporting, Smithies made his first-team debut on 5 December 2007. He came on as a 76th-minute substitute for the red-carded Matt Glennon during Huddersfield Town's 4–1 defeat by Southend United at Roots Hall. His first full start came in the 4–0 defeat at Leeds United on 8 December, after Glennon lost an appeal against his dismissal and Town were refused permission to loan an emergency goalkeeper on the grounds that Smithies was registered as a professional.

Smithies' first appearance at the Galpharm Stadium for a first-team match was on 6 December 2008. In this match, caretaker manager Gerry Murphy dropped regular goalkeeper Matt Glennon in favour of the young custodian, who went on to help Huddersfield to a 2–1 victory over Walsall. The first clean sheet he kept for the club came on 13 December 2008. In the 1–0 win over Southend United, Smithies saved a penalty from James Walker, 10 minutes from time. Smithies became the first choice keeper for the remainder of the 2008–09 season and, after the arrival of manager Lee Clark, made the number one jersey his own.

Throughout the 2009–10 season, Smithies was the only player to play in each and every league and cup match for Huddersfield. He made 48 starts, 17 of which resulted in a clean sheet for the Terriers. His contribution in helping Huddersfield to a final position inside the League One playoffs was reflected by him winning the club's Young Player of the Year Trophy.

In conceding just 56 goals in such a competitive campaign, he won both praise and admiration from many quarters; earning the Football League's 'Young Player of the Month' award in February 2010 along the way. On 17 November 2009 Smithies was linked with Stoke City after a scout from the club was the latest in a long string of Premier League interest to be seen at the Galpharm. This interest was played down by Lee Clark and Tony Coton, and Smithies insisted he was happy to be at Huddersfield. Smithies was named as the Football League Young Player of the Month for February 2010 after keeping three clean sheets in seven undefeated Huddersfield Town matches.

Smithies' 2010–11 campaign was punctuated by injury, restricting him to just 27 appearances in all competitions throughout the season. His performances, on the occasions he did play, earned him a call up to the England under-21 squad, although he was unable to play – again due to injury.

In January 2011, he was linked with a £1.5m move to Aston Villa, after Villa manager Gérard Houllier was said to have been impressed with his performance against Sheffield Wednesday.

Further speculation relating to his future at the club followed Huddersfield's 3–0 defeat against Peterborough United in the League One play-off final, and he was linked with a move to Leicester City, along with teammate Lee Peltier. However, when Leicester had a bid for Kasper Schmeichel accepted by Leeds United in June, speculation that Smithies could be heading for Leeds was rejected by Huddersfield chief executive Nigel Clibbens.

Smithies' absence from the squad during 2010–11 through injury allowed Ian Bennett to become first choice goalkeeper, backed up by fellow veteran Nick Colgan. His injury meant he remained sidelined for the first half of the season, and had to wait until 14 February 2012 to make his first appearance in the 2011–12 campaign. This came in the 1–0 home defeat to Sheffield United, a result which would cost manager Lee Clark his job the following day. This was followed by his first clean sheet of the campaign in Huddersfield's 2–0 home win over Exeter City on 25 February 2012. During the second leg League One play-off match against Milton Keynes Dons he came on as a substitute for Bennett, who had gone off with an injured hand. Town lost the match 2–1 but reached the final against Sheffield United 3–2 on aggregate. Smithies started in the final, which finished 0–0 thanks to some excellent saves from the young custodian. In the penalty shoot-out Smithies performed more heroics, saving three of the Sheffield penalties. After 10 penalties each, the sides were still inseparable, and Smithies and opposite number Steve Simonsen stepped up to take the next penalties for their sides. Smithies scored in emphatic fashion, before Simonsen put his penalty over the bar to give promotion to the terriers.

On 17 August 2012, Smithies began his debut season in the Championship with Huddersfield in a 1–0 away defeat at eventual league winners Cardiff City. He went on to start all 46 of Huddersfield's Championship fixtures, as well as all but one of the clubs five cup matches during the season, conceding 79 goals in the process.

Smithies started his second season in the Championship how he started his first, by starting all Huddersfield's opening eleven fixtures in all competitions, conceding 10 goals during that time. On 25 September 2013, Smithies agreed a new one-year contract extension at the club, keeping him at the John Smith's Stadium at least until the summer of 2016, with the Club having the option for a further year to June 2017.

Smithies started his third season in the Championship as first choice goalkeeper, ahead of Joe Murphy. He conceded four goals on the opening day in a 4–0 home defeat to Bournemouth, but did save a penalty. The match would prove to be manager Mark Robins' last for the club.

On 20 August 2015, Smithies joined Queens Park Rangers for an undisclosed fee, signing a three-year deal.

Smithies was initially the backup goalkeeper to Rob Green. Due to a clause in his contract, Green did not play from 1 January 2016 to the end of the season. Smithies and Matt Ingram vied for the number 1 spot. He played 18 Championship matches that season.

Smithies QPR's first choice goalkeeper for the 2016–17 season. He was in inspired form making 46 appearances and keeping 7 clean sheets. Smithies won the QPR player's player of the season, supporters' player of the season and the Junior Hoops players of the season.

Smithies signed for newly promoted Premier League club Cardiff City on 28 June 2018 on a four-year contract for an undisclosed fee.

He has four caps for the England U-16's and 10 caps for the England U-17's including five during the 2007 FIFA U-17 World Cup in South Korea. In this competition he helped England U-17's make it to the Quarter-finals, before they were eventually eliminated by Germany after a 4–1 defeat.

On 20 November 2007, Smithies made his debut for the England U-18 team, where he played 45 minutes in their 2–0 win against Ghana U-18's at Gillingham's Priestfield Stadium. In November 2008, Smithies received his first England U-19 call up for a friendly against Germany U-19. His first match for the U19's came against Spain U-19 at Bournemouth's Dean Court ground on 10 February 2009, in a 3–0 defeat.

On 24 August 2010, Smithies received his first call-up to the England U-21's for their matches against Portugal U-21's and Lithuania U-21's.

Huddersfield Town

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="36633786" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36633786" title="Callum Paterson">
Callum Paterson

Callum Thomas Owen Paterson (born 13 October 1994) is a professional footballer who plays for Premier League club Cardiff City and Scotland. Paterson started his career with Heart of Midlothian, helping them win promotion to the Scottish Premiership in 2015. He moved to Cardiff City in 2017, and helped them win promotion to the Premier League in 2018.

Paterson mainly played for Hearts as a right-back, but was also sometimes used as a striker. Since moving to Cardiff he has mainly played as a midfielder, but will occasionally play higher up the pitch to help aid the attack. He has been praised for his work rate, pace, aerial ability, positioning, and goalscoring prowess.

Paterson's father is Scottish and his mother is from Zimbabwe. His maternal grandfather is South African. Paterson was born in London and moved from there to Scotland when he was three years old. He grew up in South Queensferry where he attended Queensferry High School. He is the cousin of fellow footballer Michael Travis.

Paterson began his career as a youth player at Tynecastle before joining Heart of Midlothian in 2010. A member of the club's Under-20 side he was promoted to the first team during pre-season in the summer of 2012 and made his first team debut on 14 July, in a friendly against Raith Rovers where he scored the first goal of the game. Having impressed during these pre-season fixtures, on 4 August he made his Scottish Premier League (SPL) debut aged 17, in a 2–0 win over St Johnstone. He made his European debut on 23 August, in a 1–0 defeat to Liverpool at Tynecastle. 

On 31 August 2012, Paterson signed a new contract extending his stay with the club until 2015. On 22 September 2012, he scored his first two Career goals in a 3–0 win over Dundee Utd in the SPL. On 22 January 2013, Paterson suffered ligament damage to his foot in training that ruled him out of the Scottish League Cup Semi-final against Inverness that weekend. The injury required surgery and ultimately ruled him out for the remainder of the season. During his debut season Paterson made twenty seven appearances, scoring four times In doing so he played as a right-back, midfielder and as a striker, with the latter being the position he played in before joining Hearts.

On 11 August 2013, Paterson scored his first goal of the 2013–14 campaign, when he headed home the only goal in the Edinburgh derby against Hibernian at Tynecastle. On 27 April 2014, Paterson scored a brace against city rivals Hibernian in a 2–1 win. A week later he scored again in a 5–0 win over Kilmarnock and also scored three days later against Partick Thistle. Hearts were relegated at the end of the season, but immediately won promotion by winning the 2014–15 Scottish Championship. In their first season back in the top flight, Hearts finished third in the 2015–16 Scottish Premiership and qualified for European competition.

During the summer of 2016, Patterson was subject to interest from several EFL Championship sides, with Hearts rejecting two bids from Wigan Athletic. Despite the interest, he stayed at the club, managing to score 9 goals in 20 appearances, before suffering a serious knee injury on 27 December, which ruled him out for six to nine months. Despite missing the last few months of the season, Paterson managed to pick up the club's Young Player of the Year Award.

On 7 June 2017, Paterson agreed a three-year deal with EFL Championship club Cardiff City. The knee injury suffered at Hearts kept him out of the first two months of the season, making his playing return for the Under-23 side in a 4–0 win over Burnley, on 18 September. On 21 October, Paterson returned to the first team, making his debut in a 1–0 win over Middlesbrough, before scoring his first goal for the club, the winner at Barnsley, a month later. Cardiff manager, Neil Warnock moved Paterson into a central midfield position in the new year, later stating the reasoning behind the move was because he couldn't defend. Following his move to the new position, Paterson scored a brace against Sunderland on 13 January and found the back of the net three times in March. He continued his good form throughout the rest of the season, scoring 10 goals, ending as the club's top goal scorer in the league, as they were promoted to the Premier League. Paterson was also voted Young Player of the Season by the Cardiff fans.

Paterson played his first Premier League game against Bournemouth on the opening day of the season. As Cardiff struggled for goals, Paterson was moved into a central forward role, where he scored his first Premier League goal in a 4–2 win over Fulham.

Paterson earned caps at both under-18 and under-19 level in 2012 before establishing himself as a regular in Scotland under-21 squads.

On 10 November 2014, manager Gordon Strachan called Paterson into the senior Scottish squad for the first time after Phil Bardsley pulled out of the squad injured, ahead of a European qualifier against the Republic of Ireland and a friendly against England.

He made his senior debut for Scotland on 29 May 2016 in a 1–0 friendly defeat against Italy.

Heart of Midlothian

Cardiff City

Individual


</doc>
<doc id="29421863" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29421863" title="Bobby Reid">
Bobby Reid

Bobby Reid may refer to:




</doc>
<doc id="25081571" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25081571" title="Leandro Bacuna">
Leandro Bacuna

Leandro Jones Johan Bacuna (born 21 August 1991) is a professional footballer who plays for Welsh club Cardiff City as a midfielder and right back. Bacuna was capped 20 times at youth levels for the Netherlands and also represented the Netherlands Antilles at youth level. Bacuna represents the Curaçao national team, the successor side to the Netherlands Antilles, and won the 2017 Caribbean Cup with the side in July 2017.

On 30 October 2009, Bacuna made his first team debut for Groningen in an Eredivisie match against PSV. Bacuna has also played for Groningen's youth teams. On 6 November 2009, he scored his first goal for the first team in a league match against Heracles Almelo, an eventual 4–1 victory for Groningen.

It was announced on 13 June 2013 that Bacuna had signed a three-year contract with Premier League club Aston Villa. Handed the number 7 shirt, Bacuna impressed many with his debut season for the Villains, despite constantly playing out of position at right back. Bacuna scored his first Premier League goal on 28 September at home to Manchester City. His second goal came from a free-kick in the claret and blues' 2–0 victory over Cardiff City. He continued his goalscoring run with goals against West Bromwich Albion, Everton and Norwich. 

In the 2014–15 season, however, Bacuna found it harder to break into the starting line-up, starting just one game in the Premier League. On 15 February 2015, he scored the first of two Villa goals in the fifth round of the FA Cup in a 2–1 win over Leicester City, taking the club into the quarter-finals.

On 20 August 2015, Bacuna signed a new long-term contract with the club.

On 13 August 2017, Bacuna moved to Reading, signing a four-year contract. He scored his first goal for Reading in an EFL Cup tie against Millwall on 22 August 2017.

On 31 January 2019, Bacuna moved to Premier League side Cardiff City, signing a four-and-a-half year deal for a transfer fee believed to be around £3 million.

Born in the Netherlands to parents of Curaçaoan descent, Bacuna played for the Netherlands Antilles under-20 side, as well as various youth Dutch teams. He received his first Curaçao national team call-up in March 2016, earning his first cap in a 1–0 loss to Barbados.
He is the older brother of professional footballer Juninho Bacuna.




 


</doc>
<doc id="16135942" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16135942" title="Aron Gunnarsson">
Aron Gunnarsson

Aron Einar Malmquist Gunnarsson (born 22 April 1989) is an Icelandic professional footballer who plays for Welsh club Cardiff City and captains the Icelandic national team. He can play either as a defensive midfielder or a central midfielder.

He began his career at Þór Akureyri, and played one match for Dutch club AZ before joining England's Coventry City in 2008. After 133 matches and 7 goals in three seasons for them, he transferred to Cardiff City, where he was a runner-up in the 2012 Football League Cup Final and played in the 2013–14 Premier League.

Aron plays for Iceland at international level, having made his senior debut in 2008, and has earned over 80 caps for them. He has been Iceland's captain since mid-2012, captaining the team to the quarter-finals at their first major tournament, UEFA Euro 2016.

Born in Akureyri, Aron began playing football in his native Iceland on gravel pitches. During the winter months, snow and ice left football pitches unplayable and Aron instead played handball, making three appearances in the Icelandic handball League at the age of fifteen. He began his football career with local side Þór Akureyri in 2005 and, after investment in indoor pitches by the Icelandic government, began to train all year round. At the age of seventeen, Aron moved to the Netherlands, joining the youth academy at AZ. After initially struggling with homesickness, he settled in the country and made his debut for the club during the 2007–08 season.

Aron signed for English Championship team Coventry City on 17 June 2008, signing a three-year contract for an undisclosed fee. He made his debut on the opening day of the Championship season against Norwich City, where Coventry won 2–0. He scored his first career goal on 14 February 2009 in an FA Cup match against Premier League side Blackburn Rovers. During his time at Coventry, Aron attracted Premier League interest leading Coventry City to offer him an improved deal on 12 March. His first league goal came against Crystal Palace. At the end of his first season in England, Aron was voted the Coventry City Supporter's Player of the Year as well as the club's Community Award.

The following season, Aron changed his shirt number from 12 to 17, to mirror the squad number of his brother, who is a professional handball player. The following season, he continued as a vital part of the Coventry midfield, throughout the season he made 42 appearances and scored one goal against Middlesbrough.

Coventry City started the 2010–11 season strongly looking like they were pushing for play-off places. Aron opened his season's goal scoring count with a goal against newly promoted, Millwall, despite Coventry losing 3–1. After three years at Coventry, he scored his first goal at Coventry City's home ground, the Ricoh Arena, against Preston North End. Three days later, Aron scored his second goal in two matches against Doncaster Rovers. He was out of contract at the end of the season and on 10 December, Aron stated his desire to stay at Coventry. However the following week, he received his first red card of his career against Norwich City. However a deal for a new contract couldn't be reached between his agent and Coventry, and at the end of the season the club gave him a deadline date to agree to stay.

However, due to Aron and his agent not being able to reach an agreement with Coventry, he was linked with moves away and his agent confirmed that fellow Championship outfit Cardiff City were favourites to sign him.

On 8 July 2011, Aron agreed a three-year deal with fellow Championship team Cardiff City on a free transfer, as the fifth signing for new manager Malky Mackay. Coventry were due compensation via him being under the age of 24.

He made his debut on 7 August in the first match of the new season, playing the full 90 minutes in the 1–0 away win over West Ham United. In his second match, Aron limped off with an ankle injury after only ten minutes against Bristol City, the injury sidelining him for a week. He returned after the September international break, insisting his injury was behind him. On 22 October, Aron scored two goals in a 5–3 victory against Barnsley, receiving the man of the match award.

Aron played the entirety of the 2012 Football League Cup Final, as City were beaten 3–2 on penalties after by Premier League club Liverpool at Wembley Stadium.

Aron scored Cardiff's first goal in the Premier League on 25 August 2013, against Manchester City in a 3–2 win. In June 2015 he signed a new contract with the club, until the summer of 2018.

Following his return from Euro 2016, Aron was linked with a move away from the Welsh capital, with Derby County and Norwich City claimed to be interested. However, Cardiff City manager, Paul Trollope, described him as "a very important player" to the club. His performances under Trollope and his eventual replacement Neil Warnock saw him awarded the club's Player of the Year award at the end of the season.

The following season, Aron failed to nail down a consistent place in the starting eleven, due to a number of injuries throughout the first half of the season. Despite his injury problems, Cardiff offered him a new contract, which was later rejected by the player. Aron returned to the side for the final run-in, where he scored the winning goal against Nottingham Forest and ultimately helped Cardiff gain promotion to the Premier League.

In July 2018, Aron signed a new one-year deal.

In March 2019 it was announced that Aron would leave the club at the end of the season.

Aron made his international debut for Iceland on 2 February 2008. Aron was called up to the 2011 European Under-21 Championship Iceland squad, which took place in Denmark. In the first match, Iceland beat hosts Denmark 3–1. This was followed with a 2–0 loss to Belarus, where Aron was sent off. The two losses saw Iceland go out of the tournament via a tie breaker. Aron has been a regular player in the senior side since debuting despite helping the U-21 side when they qualified for the UEFA Under-21 Championship.

Aron was named as the permanent captain of the national team before a friendly match against the Faroe Islands in August 2012 at the young age of 23, ahead of his 29th cap. Under his captaincy, Iceland qualified for the play-off round of FIFA World Cup qualification for the first time, where they lost 2–0 on aggregate to Croatia.

On 10 October 2014, Aron scored his first senior international goal in Iceland's 3–0 away win against Latvia in UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying. He scored again in a 2–1 defeat of the Czech Republic on 12 June 2015. On 6 September, he was sent off in the last minute of a goalless draw at Laugardalsvöllur in Reykjavík against Kazakhstan, a result which put Iceland into their first major international tournament.

Aron captained Iceland at their first major international tournament, UEFA Euro 2016 in France. After their first match, a shock 1–1 draw with Portugal in Saint-Étienne, opposing skipper Cristiano Ronaldo refused to trade shirts with him. Iceland finished second in their group, after beating Austria and drawing against Hungary, and then knocked out England in the round of 16. They were defeated by France, 5–2, in the quarter-final. Aron played in all five games.

In May 2018 he was named in Iceland’s 23 man squad for the 2018 World Cup in Russia.

His older brother Arnór Þór Gunnarsson plays handball for the Icelandic national team.

Cardiff City


</doc>
<doc id="25931840" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25931840" title="Greg Cunningham">
Greg Cunningham

Gregory Richard Cunningham (born 31 January 1991) is an Irish professional footballer who plays as a left back for Premier League side Cardiff City and the Republic of Ireland national team.

Born in Galway, County Galway, Cunningham began his career with Cregmore FC. In 2004, he joined Mervue United before earning a contract in the Manchester City Academy. Cunningham made his first team debut for Manchester City as a 46th minute substitute in a 4–2 victory over Scunthorpe United in the FA Cup on 24 January 2010 where he played on the left side of the City defence. Cunningham made his first Premier League appearance on 11 April 2010 against Birmingham City as a substitute for Adam Johnson in the final minutes of the game. Cunningham made his second Premier League appearance on 9 May 2010 against West Ham United as a substitute for Johnson, just 2 minutes of the final minutes of the game. On 26 August 2010, Cunningham made his European debut in Europa League Qualifiers Second Leg against Politehnica Timișoara, coming on as a 54th-minute substitute for Nigel de Jong in a 2–0 win. On 22 September 2010, Cunningham made his first start for the club and played 90 minutes in a 2-1 loss against West Bromwich Albion in the League Cup.

On 21 October 2010, Cunningham joined Championship side Leicester City on loan until January 2011. On 23 October 2010, Cunningham made his debut for the club in a 2–0 loss against Swansea City where he played the full 90 minutes. Cunningham became a regular left-back in the starting eleven and made 12 starts. On 1 January 2011, Cunningham fractured his tibia in a challenge with Hull City's Liam Rosenior. Rosenior was sent off and Cunningham had to be substituted in a 1–0 win for Leicester and he was ruled out of action for up to four months, which ended his loan spell at Leicester City. After the match, Sven-Göran Eriksson say his injury was 'a complete accident' and said:

On 25 October 2011, Cunningham joined Championship side Nottingham Forest on loan until 31 December after an injury crisis at the club left them desperately on short defensive options. After his move to Nottingham Forest, Cunningham says he expected to make an impact for the club and was looking forward to playing regularly for the club Nottingham Forest duo Lee Camp and Ishmael Miller agreed with Cunningham's expectations. On 29 October 2011, Cunningham made his debut for the club in a 1–0 loss against Hull City before being substituted early in the second-half. On 1 November 2011, Cunningham played 90 minutes in a 1–0 win over Reading. Since making his debut, Cunningham became a regular in the starting eleven, playing at left back.

On 29 December, Cunningham's loan was extended until the end of the season. After his loan was extended, manager Steve Cotterill says he would want to sign Cunningham on a permanent basis, only if the money can be found in the near future. After his loan spell ended, Cotterill praised Cunningham (among the loan signing) for helping the club pull away from the relegation zone and stay in the Championship next season.

The following season, Cunningham told BBC Sport he intended to leave Manchester City to further his career. On 5 July 2012, Cunningham signed a four-year contract at Bristol City, for an undisclosed fee.

Cunningham made his debut on the opening game of the season, in a 1–0 loss against Nottingham Forest. Then, in a 2–1 win over Peterborough United, on 18 September 2012, Cunningham received a heavy tackle from Tyrone Barnett after Barnett made a reckless challenge on him, which resulted in Cunningham being stretched off and Barnett being booked. After the match, Derek McInnes believes that Barnett should have been sent-off for the challenge Cunningham was ruled out for two months after rupturing his tendon. In mid-December, Cunningham recovered from the injury and made his return in a 2–0 loss against Derby County on 15 December 2012. On 29 January 2013, Cunningham scored his first goal for Bristol City against Watford, a cross that had looped over Manuel Alumunia and found its way into the back of the net. Since his recovery from injury, Cunningham continued to retain his first team place in the left-back position, though sometimes plays in the left-midfield, but unfortunately, the club was relegated to League One.

Bristol City gave Cunningham permission to speak to Preston North End after accepting an undisclosed bid, he spent the weekend with Preston in Scotland at a training camp before the deal was completed on 27 July 2015.

On 24 July 2017, Cunningham was appointed captain of Preston until such a time as Tom Clarke became fit again.

On 13 June 2018, Cunningham joined Cardiff City for an undisclosed fee, believed to be around £4 million signing a 3-year contract.

Cunningham had been capped by the Republic of Ireland at youth level before being called up to the senior international squad by manager Giovanni Trapattoni on 22 February 2010 for a friendly against Brazil. On 28 May 2010, Cunningham made his debut for Ireland in a 3–0 win against Algeria at the RDS.

Bristol City




</doc>
<doc id="41376002" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=41376002" title="Víctor Camarasa">
Víctor Camarasa

Víctor Camarasa Ferrando (born 28 May 1994) is a Spanish professional footballer who plays for Welsh club Cardiff City on loan from Real Betis as a central midfielder.

Born in Meliana, Valencian Community, Camarasa joined local Valencia CF's youth categories in 2001, aged seven. Ten years later he was released, and eventually finished his formation with neighbouring Levante UD, making his senior debuts with the reserve side in the 2012–13 season, in Segunda División B.

On 7 December 2013, Camarasa played his first official game with the main squad, starting in a 0–1 away loss against Recreativo de Huelva for the campaign's Copa del Rey. Two days later he signed a new six-year deal with the club, and he scored his first goal on the 17th, helping turn the Cup deficit in his team's favour by netting the last in the 4–0 home win.

Camarasa made his La Liga debut on 4 January 2014, coming on as a substitute for Simão Mate in a 0–2 away loss against Valencia CF. In July he was promoted to the first team, and was made a starter by new manager José Luis Mendilibar.

On 4 October 2014, Camarasa scored his first goal in the top flight, netting his side's second in a 3–3 draw at SD Eibar. On 11 August 2016, after suffering relegation, he was loaned to Deportivo Alavés also in the top tier, for one year.

On 29 June 2017, Camarasa signed a five-year contract with fellow league club Real Betis. He scored his first competitive goal for them on 18 December, helping close a 2–0 away defeat of neighbouring Málaga CF.

On 9 August 2018, Camarasa joined Cardiff City on loan for the 2018–19 season. He made his Premier League debut nine days later, playing 76 minutes in a 0–0 home draw against Newcastle United. His first goal came on 2 September, but in a 2–3 loss to Arsenal also at the Cardiff City Stadium.



</doc>
<doc id="8179770" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8179770" title="Sol Bamba">
Sol Bamba

Souleymane Bamba (born 13 January 1985) is a professional footballer who plays for Premier League side Cardiff City and the Ivory Coast national team as a centre-back.

Bamba started his career in his native France with Paris Saint-Germain, but failed to establish himself in their first team. He moved to Scotland to join Dunfermline Athletic in 2006, helping the club reach the final of the Scottish Cup in his first season. Two years later, he was transferred to Hibernian, before joining English side Leicester City in January 2011. 

He was sold to Turkish club Trabzonspor in 2012 for £750,000 before joining Palermo. However, he was loaned to Leeds United after making only one appearance in six months. He eventually joined Leeds on a permanent deal and was appointed club captain, spending a further year with the club before being released and subsequently joining Cardiff City. In his first full season with Cardiff, he helped the side win promotion to the Premier League.

Born in France to Ivorian parents, Bamba represented Ivory Coast in the 2008 Olympic Games and became a regular for the senior national side until his most recent cap in 2014. In 2012, he was part of the side that reached the final of the Africa Cup of Nations.

Bamba began his career with Ligue 1 club Paris Saint-Germain (PSG) at the age of 11. He had been spotted by club scouts playing street football in Paris but had initially turned the club down as his mother hoped for him to become a doctor. He lived with his parents Sehrata and Bakary Bamba in Ivry-sur-Seine, a suburb in central Paris. Since his family could not afford the travel to the club's training facilities outside the city, he moved away from his family home to instead live at the club's academy. Originally playing as a defensive midfielder, he converted to playing as a central defender at the age of 15 after impressing there as cover for a teammate who had missed a match due to being stuck in traffic.

Despite impressing for PSG's youth and B teams, he only appeared in two first team games, in his final year at the club at the age of 21. Dissatisfied with his lack of appearances, Bamba asked to be sent out on loan to gain experience but was denied by manager, Vahid Halilhodžić, causing Bamba to reject PSG's offer of a new contract and subsequently leave the club. He later claimed that PSG had damaged potential transfers to other French sides after he left the club, stating "I was disappointed because my club said, 'He's a good player but he's a tough guy – he doesn't listen and he can get the team into trouble."

After an initial trial period, Bamba signed for Scottish Premier League side Dunfermline Athletic in July 2006 on a two-year contract. Jim Leishman later revealed that he had been intending to bring over another player from France on trial, but this deal fell through and Bamba's agent sent him instead. Leishman was immediately impressed by Bamba's physique and his performance as a trialist during a preseason friendly against West Bromwich Albion striker John Hartson. He made his competitive debut for the club in Dunfermline's opening league match of the season, a 2–1 defeat to Hearts. On 2 December 2006, Bamba was sent off for the first time in his professional career after pushing Steven Naismith in the chest during a 5–1 defeat to Kilmarnock.

In his first season at the club, Bamba was part of the squad that reached the 2007 Scottish Cup Final and played in a 1–0 defeat to Celtic in the final. However, the club also suffered relegation from the Scottish Premier League after a seven-year spell in the division. Bamba signed a two-year contract extension at the start of the 2007–08 season. The extension brought an end to rumours of his desire to leave the club in order to play at a higher level and further his chances of breaking into the Ivory Coast national side, having not played in any of Dunfermline's preseason matches.

Bamba was allowed to go on trial with Championship side Watford in July 2008, appearing in a friendly for them against Boreham Wood. Soon afterwards, manager Jim McIntyre said he expected a fee to be agreed between Dunfermline and Watford, which would allow Bamba to move to the Championship side. The deal was thought to be almost complete, with Watford sending a doctor to China, where Bamba had travelled with the Ivory Coast Olympic squad, to conduct his medical. However, Watford later pulled out for unknown reasons. A few weeks later, Dunfermline accepted offers of £50,000 for Bamba to move to either Hibernian and Motherwell, keeping him in the Scottish Premier League.

Bamba chose to move to Hibernian, signing a three-year contract with the club. As part of the transfer deal, Dunfermline were due 10% of any future transfer fee. He was sent off on his debut for a second bookable offence against Dundee United, but Bamba subsequently established himself in the Hibs first team. Despite being a natural centre back, manager Mixu Paatelainen praised Bamba's performance as a defensive midfielder during a 2–0 win over Celtic in December 2008. Paatelainen commented further that he believed Bamba had improved as a player since his spell at Dunfermline, with him no longer going to ground when making a challenge, and described him as possessing "tremendous pace and physical presence." Bamba quickly became a popular player with the Hibs support due to his tough and committed tackling in this new role.

Following Paatelainen's departure, new manager John Hughes moved Bamba back to a central defensive role after the departure of Rob Jones in the 2009 season. In his second match in this position, Bamba scored his first ever professional goal in a 3–1 win against Falkirk on 22 August, heading in from a John Rankin corner. Coincidentally, he scored his second goal for the club at the same ground against the same team and in another 3–1 win, on 27 March. The "Edinburgh Evening News" reported on 8 May 2010 that Bamba's performances had "not gone unnoticed", with scouts from Fulham and Rennes due to watch Bamba. Sven-Göran Eriksson, the new manager of the Ivorian national team, was also due to watch Bamba ahead of the 2010 World Cup, but was not spotted at the last game played by Hibs in the 2009–10 season.

Bamba angered manager John Hughes when he failed to report for a pre-season tour of the Netherlands in July 2010. Bamba responded angrily to the criticism by claiming that he needed a full three weeks off after returning from the World Cup and had attempted to contact both Hughes and Hibernian's chairman to discuss the situation, but Hughes dropped Bamba from the first team squad when he eventually returned to Edinburgh. Bamba was made to train with the club's youth team on his return but was recalled for the second leg of a UEFA Europa League tie with NK Maribor at Easter Road, which Hibs lost 3–2 on the night and 6–2 on aggregate. Following the incident, manager Hughes stated his desire for the situation to be forgotten. During his time with Hibs, he made 80 appearances in all competitions, scoring four times.

With Bamba's contract with Hibs due to expire at the end of the 2010–11 season, the club agreed on a deal with Football League Championship club Leicester City for his transfer. The deal was confirmed on 2 January 2011, with Bamba joining for an undisclosed fee midway through the season, although sources placed the figure around £250,000 with Hibs also due to receive a percentage of any future transfer fee. He was reunited at Leicester with his former Ivory Coast manager, Sven-Göran Eriksson. He made his debut for the club in a 2–2 draw against Manchester City on 9 January in the third round of the FA Cup, scoring with his first touch of the ball. He scored his first two league goals in a 4–2 win over Millwall on 22 January.

After speculation linking him with several Premier League sides, including Blackburn Rovers, and French side Marseille during the 2011 summer transfer window, Bamba signed a new contract with Leicester in September 2011. During negotiations, Eriksson compared Bamba's style of play to that of former German international player Franz Beckenbauer. Blackburn manager Steve Kean had claimed that the two clubs had made a bid for Bamba and described the move as being "quite close" to being completed.

After Eriksson was replaced by Nigel Pearson as Leicester manager, Bamba played less regularly, particularly after January when the club signed Wes Morgan and Bamba missed a month to play in the African Cup of Nations with Ivory Coast. In his 17 months at the club, in total he played 55 games for the club in all competitions, scoring four goals. He later expressed his regret at leaving the club, stating his belief in Pearson's ability to help them win promotion to the Premier League.

Bamba signed for Turkish club Trabzonspor in June 2012 for a fee of £750,000 after being recommended to the club by his international teammate Didier Zokora. He made his debut for the club on 26 August 2012 playing the full 90 minutes, in a 2–0 victory at home to Elazigspor. He only made 18 appearances during his first season at the club, missing a proportion of fixtures in December and January in part because he was away with Ivory Coast as they qualified for the 2013 African Cup of Nations.

During the 2013–14 season, Bamba made 15 appearances for Trabzonspor in the first half of the season, including being a regular starter in their Europa League campaign. However, on 22 January 2014, he picked up an ankle injury which ruled him out for the majority of the latter part of the season. Bamba was not selected to play for Tranzonspor again after suffering the injury, however he recovered in time to play for Ivory Coast at the 2014 FIFA World Cup.

On 26 August 2014, after having been released by Trabzonspor, Bamba agreed a three-year deal with newly promoted Serie A club Palermo. He made his Palermo debut on 24 September 2014, when he started the match for Palermo in a 3–3 draw against Napoli. However, he made no further appearances for the club. After leaving the club, he expressed his confusion over not playing more for Palermo, commenting "The manager would say ‘you’re not far off, keep doing what you’re doing and you’ll be playing.’ Well, after one month then two, three and four you start to get worried."

On 23 January 2015, less than six months into his Palermo contract, Bamba was loaned to Championship side Leeds United for the remainder of the season, with the possibility of making the transfer permanent at a later date. He made his debut for Leeds in a 2–1 West Yorkshire derby win over Huddersfield Town a week later. Less than a month after joining the side, Bamba was named captain for three games in place of Liam Cooper. In particular, he served as captain when Leeds beat the then league leaders Middlesbrough 1–0, with Bamba receiving praise for his performance. 

Bamba scored his first goal for Leeds against Fulham in a 3–0 away victory in March. After impressing during his time at Leeds, Bamba revealed his desire to join the club on a permanent basis. However, he was also outspoken towards the club's owner Massimo Cellino advising "the person in charge has to do better for the sake of the club and the supporters". In June, Leeds arranged with Bamba's club Palermo to sign him on a permanent basis for an undisclosed fee. The deal was for two years with the option for a third year. New Leeds United head coach Uwe Rösler described Bamba as "a match-winner in both boxes", and said that "he brings fantastic qualities with him" and "he can be a leader by himself for the young team he is working with".

In the offseason, Bamba was appointed captain of Leeds by head coach Uwe Rösler, taking over from previous captain Liam Cooper. Bamba received the man of the match award in a 1–1 draw against Burnley in the league on the opening day of the season. Bamba scored a "stunning" long range volley against Wolverhampton Wanderers in a 2–1 win late in the season. At the end of the 2015–16 season, Bamba was again critical of Leeds owner Cellino, calling on him to put 'promises to action'. He revealed the players were unaware if head coach Steve Evans would be retained for the following 2016–17 season, that the players were unaware of when to return for pre season training and they were told they would find out 'by text' when Cellino had made a decision. 

Nonetheless, new head coach Garry Monk announced Bamba would remain as Leeds captain for the 2016–17 season. On 7 August, Bamba scored an own goal against Queens Park Rangers in a 3–0 defeat in the opening match of the season and was subsequently dropped from the side, falling behind Kyle Bartley, Liam Cooper and Pontus Jansson in the pecking order. On 1 September 2016, Bamba, despite being Leeds' captain, was released by the club. His contract was cancelled by mutual consent following the close of the transfer window the previous day. The decision was made after Monk informed him that he would no longer be first choice at the club.

Following his release, Bamba trained with Derby County who were managed by his former Leicester boss Nigel Pearson but was not offered a deal. He instead joined Neil Warnock at Cardiff City in October 2016, signing a two-year contract. Warnock had long been keen on signing Bamba at previous clubs and had contacted him a month before the move, when both were without a club, and urged him to wait for Warnock's appointment at a new club to join him there. He made his debut for the club in a Severnside derby match against Bristol City on 14 October, scoring the winning goal as the "Bluebirds" won 2–1. His performances for Cardiff led manager Warnock to declare that "I wouldn't want anyone else. I don't think there's anyone better." Bamba received his first red card in seven years against Ipswich Town in December, following a scuffle with forward, David McGoldrick. After receiving the red card, Bamba clashed with the fourth official before being physically restrained by Warnock and leaving the pitch. His reaction led to a three match ban. In April, Bamba suffered a groin injury against Barnsley, which ended his season prematurely.

Bamba returned to the squad at the beginning of the 2017–18 season, helping Cardiff win their three opening games of the season, for the first time in their history. He signed a new three-year contract on 25 August 2017, following it up by heading in the winner against Queens Park Rangers the next day. He went on to help the club win promotion to the Premier League after finishing the season in second place. He was ever present in the league, appearing in all 46 league matches, and was named in the PFA Championship Team of the Year.

He made his debut in the Premier League in Cardiff's first match of the 2018–19 season, a 2–0 defeat to A.F.C. Bournemouth, before scoring his first goal in the top division in a 4–1 defeat to Chelsea in September 2018. Bamba scored a further 3 goals during the season, including in wins against Brighton & Hove Albion and Southampton. Having missed only one match during the course of the season, he was ruled out for the remainder of the campaign after rupturing his cruciate knee ligaments in a defeat against Wolverhampton Wanderers on 5 March 2019.

Although born in France, Bamba represents his parents' nation of Ivory Coast. He featured in the 2003 FIFA World Youth Championship, the 2005 African Youth Championship and the 2008 Toulon Tournament. Bamba was part of the Ivory Coast squad that reached the quarter-finals of the 2008 Olympic Games.
Bamba won his first cap at full international level for Ivory Coast in a 2008 friendly match against Israel, and his second cap as a late substitute in a friendly against Turkey. Bamba made his competitive debut in a 5–0 win against Malawi in a 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifying match, again as a late substitute. This match was played in the aftermath of the Houphouët-Boigny Arena stampede, which killed dozens of Ivorian spectators. Bamba became a regular in the national team as they qualified for the 2010 Africa Cup of Nations and the 2010 FIFA World Cup. Bamba scored his first goal for the team in a friendly against Rwanda, as part of the squad's preparation for the 2010 African Cup. He played in all of Ivory Coast's matches at the 2010 Africa Cup of Nations, but the team suffered a quarter-final defeat to Algeria after extra time. The "uneasy" central defensive partnership between Kolo Touré and Bamba was cited as one of the reasons for their defeat. The tournament had been played in the shadow of the shooting of the Togo team bus, however, with death threats also being made against the Ivory Coast team.

Manager Vahid Halilhodžić, who had worked with Bamba at PSG and given him his first appearances at club and international level, was sacked after the tournament. The new Ivorian coach, Sven-Göran Eriksson, selected Bamba in his provisional 30-man squad for the 2010 World Cup on 11 May. Bamba scored in Eriksson's first match in charge, a 2–2 draw with Paraguay. Bamba was selected in the Ivory Coast's 23-man World Cup squad, but was dropped from the starting lineup, with midfielder Didier Zokora chosen to partner with Kolo Touré in central defence.

Bamba resumed his partnership with Touré in the 2012 Africa Cup of Nations. Ivory Coast did not concede a goal during the entire tournament, but lost the final against Zambia on a penalty shootout. At the 2014 FIFA World Cup, Bamba played in central defence alongside Zokora after Toure contracted malaria in the period before the tournament. Bamba was booked in the first match, which Ivory Coast won 2–1 against Japan. Ivory Coast were eliminated at the group stage after suffering 2–1 defeats against both Colombia and Greece.

Bamba was called up to the squad for 10 September 2014 fixture against Cameroon, however on 29 December 2014 he was a surprising omission from the Ivory Coast squad for the 2015 Africa Cup of Nations. Although he has not retired from international football, he has not appeared for the side since 2014.

Chiefly a centre-back, Bamba played as a defensive midfielder during his emergence at Paris SG, before becoming a centre-back at age 15. He has sporadically played in the midfield since then, most successfully for Mixu Paatelainen at Hibs.

Jim Leishman, who signed Bamba at Dunfermline Athletic, said of his former charge in 2010: "He's certainly got the physique and he's got the potential to do it. But potential sometimes passes you by, it's all about going out and doing it. He's a great runner, he's as strong as an ox, and he's a strong tackler." "Sky Sports"' Soriebah Kajue in September 2011 said Bamba "established himself as a rock at the heart of the Foxes defence and has produced a level of consistency this year that has simply been outstanding", paying tribute to "Bamba's burgeoning reputation as a ball-playing defender".

Sven-Göran Eriksson, who managed Bamba at club level for Leicester City and internationally for the Ivory Coast, compared the defender with Franz Beckenbauer. Cardiff manager Neil Warnock regularly told Bamba "Don’t be Beckenbauer. Just kick or head it. When it’s on, pass it, but if it’s not on, just put it up there," and in December 2017 Warnock branded Bamba and fellow Cardiff centre-half Sean Morrison as better than Virgil van Dijk. Bamba's favourite players growing up were Lilian Thuram and George Weah.

Bamba met his wife Chloe while playing for Leicester. They have three children together. Bamba is multilingual, being able to speak English, French, Italian, Turkish and "the Ivorian dialect that his father used at home".

Cardiff City

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="25679508" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25679508" title="Kadeem Harris">
Kadeem Harris

Kadeem Raymond Mathurin-Harris (born 8 June 1993), known as Kadeem Harris, is an English footballer who plays for Premier League club Cardiff City, as a midfielder.

Born in Westminster, London, Harris once held the record for the youngest player ever to appear for Wycombe in the Football League, breaking Ikechi Anya's record set in 2004 by coming on as a substitute for the final 12 minutes against Yeovil Town in December 2009, aged 16 years and 201 days.

Harris made his home debut for the club against Gillingham on the last day of the 2009–10 season. He found his chances for first team football limited in the 2010–11 season, only featuring for 25 minutes in the Football League Trophy tie with Bristol Rovers. He scored his first goal for the first team in the quarter-final of the Berks & Bucks Senior Cup against Burnham. Harris was awarded the League Two Apprentice of the Year at the Football League Awards in April 2011 and later that month was one of four Wycombe scholars to be awarded professional contracts by the club. Harris was subject to a £50,000 bid by Premier League side Fulham in July 2011 but the offer was rejected by Wycombe. Harris made a late cameo appearance on the first day of the 2011–12 season against Scunthorpe United, replacing Joel Grant. He then made his first start in a competitive match for Wycombe in the League Cup during Wycombe's clash with Colchester United on 9 August 2011. Wycombe won on penalties but the game also saw Harris' record as youngest player broken by Jordon Ibe. On 24 September 2011, Harris made his first league start for club in a 1–0 win over Sheffield United. He was a first team regular and 22 appearances during the first half of the 2011–12 season, before departing the club in January 2012. Harris made 26 appearances in all competitions for Wycombe and scored no goals.

On 30 January 2012, Harris signed for Championship side Cardiff City on a three-and-half-year contract for an undisclosed fee. His maiden call up to the first team came in a 3–1 league defeat to Blackpool on 4 February 2012, when he was an unused substitute. He was an unused substitute on a further three occasions during the 2011–12 season and was not called into the squad for the playoffs or the 2012 League Cup final. Harris was only called into the first team squad on one occasion during the 2012–13 Championship-winning season, when he made his debut in a 2–1 FA Cup third round defeat against Macclesfield Town on 5 January 2013. Harris started the match and was substituted for Tommy O'Sullivan after 64 minutes. Harris received his first call into the first team squad of the 2013–14 season on 28 August 2013, when he was an unused substitute for a 2–0 League Cup first round win over Accrington Stanley. He was again an unused substitute in the following round, which saw Cardiff lose 3–2 to fellow Premier League side West Ham United.

After putting in an "outstanding" performance for Cardiff in a Professional Development League game versus Brentford, on 18 October 2013 Harris joined the League One side on a loan running until 5 January 2014. The following day, he was included in the squad to face Colchester United and after replacing Will Grigg on 65 minutes, he scored the first senior goal of his career in a 3–1 win. Harris scored his second Brentford goal in an FA Cup first round tie against local neighbours Staines Town on 9 November, scoring the second in a 5–0 victory. Harris was stretchered off with a hamstring problem in a 3–0 victory over Preston North End on 21 December, casting doubt on his loan being extended. On 26 December it was reported that Harris would be out for a month, with manager Mark Warburton keen on extending the loan. Harris tweeted on 29 December that he would be returning to Cardiff, leaving plans to extend his loan up in the air. Harris made 11 appearances for Brentford and scored two goals. It was reported in mid-March 2014 that Harris was close to a return to the Bees to cover for the injured Sam Saunders, despite being sidelined with an ankle injury himself.

The following season, Harris started to become a regular under new manager, Russell Slade, who was appointed in October. He played his first league game for Cardiff in a 5–3 loss to Bournemouth, on 20 December. Harris scored his first goal for "The Bluebirds" in a FA Cup win against Colchester United, following this with his first league goal against Norwich City.

On 22 August 2015, Harris joined League One side Barnsley on loan until 21 November 2015. He made his debut in a goalless draw against Bradford City and went onto make 14 appearances for Barnsley before returning to Cardiff.

In August 2016, Harris received a lot of praise from Cardiff fans and manager, Paul Trollope, after his performances against Blackburn Rovers and Fulham in an unusual right wing back position. Harris continued to impress under new manager, Neil Warnock and eventually found his first goal on 14 January, scoring in the Severnside derby against Bristol City in a 3–2 win. He followed this by scoring two to help Cardiff come back from 2 goals down to beat Derby County, 4–3, before scoring his third in two games against Rotherham United.

His performance throughout the season saw Harris gifted the number 11 shirt for the 2017–18 season. However, an ankle injury suffered during pre-season ruled him out for 3 months. Following several games for the under-23 side, Harris eventually made his return to the first team in a 0–0 draw at Sheffield Wednesday, replacing Junior Hoilett.

Harris scored his first goal since returning from injury in the 2018–19 season, in a 4–2 win over Fulham in the Premier League, Cardiff's first win of the campaign.



</doc>
<doc id="2192095" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2192095" title="Brian Murphy">
Brian Murphy

Brian Murphy may refer to:





</doc>
<doc id="34820739" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34820739" title="Oumar Niasse">
Oumar Niasse

El Hadji Baye Oumar Niasse (born 18 April 1990) is a Senegalese professional footballer who plays as a striker for Premier League club Cardiff City, on loan from Everton and the Senegal national team. 

Niasse has played top-flight football in Senegal, Norway, Turkey, Russia and England. He won the 2011 Senegal Premier League with Ouakam and scored in Lokomotiv Moscow's win in the 2015 Russian Cup Final. He signed for Everton for a £13.5 million transfer fee in 2016. Niasse made his full international debut for Senegal in 2013.

Born in Ouakam, Dakar Department, Niasse began his football career with hometown club US Ouakam in the second tier. He signed his first professional contract with Ouakam in 2008 and in the 2008–09 season helped his team win the Second League title by scoring 21 goals. Playing as a winger, Niasse also played a key role in Ouakam winning the Senegal Premier League title in 2011.

Niasse started a trial with Norwegian club Brann in February 2012, and after impressing signed for the club on a six-month loan. His time in Norway was hampered by poor form and injuries, and he returned to Senegal after playing just three Tippeligaen matches.

After a trial period with French club Saint-Étienne, Niasse was offered a contract to join the club but refused the offer. He joined the summer camp of Turkish Süper Lig club Akhisar Belediyespor and signed permanently with them in August 2013. Niasse scored on his debut in Turkey and ultimately finished the season with 15 goals.

Before the 2014–15 season, Niasse signed with Russian club Lokomotiv Moscow in July 2014 for a €5.5 million transfer fee. He scored Lokomotiv's equalising goal in the Russian Cup Final against Kuban Krasnodar on 21 May 2015 as his side went on to win 3–1 after extra time.

Niasse joined English Premier League club Everton on 1 February 2016 for a transfer fee of approximately £13.5 million, signing a four-and-a-half year contract. He made his debut for the club against AFC Bournemouth on 20 February 2016, entering as an 80th-minute substitute for striker Romelu Lukaku. 

After 152 minutes of football in his first season at the club, Niasse was not given a squad number for the following 2016–17 season. He was informed by then-Everton manager Ronald Koeman he would need to search for a new club during the summer 2016 transfer window, saying, "[I]f Niasse likes to play football he needs to leave Everton." 

However, following the close of the transfer deadline for loaning and signing players in England, he was listed as part of the 25-man Everton squad for the 2016–17 season submitted on 1 September 2016 and eventually issued squad number 24. 

In October 2016, Niasse was demoted to the under-23 squad and had his personal locker revoked.

On 13 January 2017, Niasse signed a loan contract with Hull City until the end of the 2016–17 season with an option for a £10 million permanent transfer from Everton. He made his debut the next day as an 83rd-minute substitute for Abel Hernández in a 3–1 home win against AFC Bournemouth. His first goal for Hull and in English football came on 26 January in the EFL Cup semi-final second leg against Manchester United, where he made his first start for the club. Hull won the second leg 2–1 but ultimately lost the tie 3–2 on aggregate. 

Niasse scored his first Premier League goal in a 2–0 victory against Liverpool on 4 February. On 11 March, he came on as a substitute against Swansea City and scored both goals in a 2–1 victory. Hull were relegated to the Championship at the end of the season and opted not to exercise its option to outright purchase Niasse.

After returning to Everton, Niasse made his first appearance since his return as a substitute in the EFL Cup third round match against Sunderland at Goodison Park on 20 September 2017, scoring Everton's third goal of a 3–0 win. Manager Ronald Koeman named Niasse in Everton's 25-man Premier League squad upon his return from loan and consequently issued him a squad number. However, Koeman omitted Niasse from Everton's UEFA Europa League squad. On 23 September, Niasse scored two goals against AFC Bournemouth in a 2–1 Premier League win, helping Everton to come back from a goal down. On 5 November, Niasse scored Everton's first goal in a 3–2 home win against Watford, having been losing 2–0. Thirteen days later, he scored in a 2–2 draw away to bottom side Crystal Palace. Niasse sparked controversy in the match by appearing to dive to win Everton a penalty, which was converted by Leighton Baines to make the score 1–1 in the first half. He subsequently became the first Premier League player to be charged with "successful deception of a match official" under The Football Association's new regulations. Everton appealed the verdict, but the FA rejected the appeal and Niasse received a two-match suspension.

On 18 January 2019, Niasse joined fellow Premier League team Cardiff City on loan for the remainder of the season.

Niasse was first selected for the Senegal national team in January 2013 as part of an all domestic-based squad. He made his debut on 15 January, starting in a 2–1 friendly loss to Chile in La Serena.

On 25 May 2015, Niasse scored his first international goals, a brace in a 3–1 win over Kosovo at the Stade de Genève.

His brother Ibrahima Niasse is also a professional footballer.

US Ouakam

Lokomotiv Moscow


</doc>
<doc id="29419087" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29419087" title="Rhys Healey">
Rhys Healey

Rhys James Evitt-Healey (born 6 December 1994) is an English professional footballer who plays as a forward for Premier League club Cardiff City.

Healey started his career with Connah's Quay Nomads, joining their youth setup at Under-16 level in 2009. He made his first team debut for the club as a substitute during a 6–1 victory on the opening Cymru Alliance match of the 2011–12 season against Caersws and made 10 league appearances as the club won promotion to the Welsh Premier League. The following season, he made his debut in the Welsh Premier League, coming off the bench against Bangor City and went on to score 12 league goals for the club during the first half of the 2012–13 season. His prolific form saw him attract the attention of several clubs and Healey spent time on trial with Stoke City and Manchester City.

On 28 January 2013, he signed for Cardiff City. In March 2014 he signed a new contract with the club. On 11 May 2014, he made his first-team debut, on the last day of the season, in a 2–1 defeat against Chelsea as a substitute in place of Craig Bellamy.

Healey signed on loan for League One club Colchester United on 19 September 2014. He joined the club as back-up to first choice striker Freddie Sears, initially signing until 20 December. Healey made his debut, coming on as a substitute in the second half, and scored in a 3–0 win over Crewe, which was followed with another in the next game, in a 4–2 loss against Preston North End. Having made ten appearance and scored four times so far, Healey loan spell with Colchester United was extended further until the end of the season. On 19 March 2015, Healey was recalled by his parent club Cardiff. On 2 April 2015, in a bizarre turn of events, Healey was re-loaned to Colchester United as a protracted loan move to League 2 team Newport County fell through after the move was blocked by FIFA. A decision that was branded "unbelievable" by Newport manager Jimmy Dack.

On 1 September 2015, Healey signed for Scottish Premiership club Dundee on loan until January 2016. He made a total of 7 appearances for the club, scoring once during a 2–1 defeat to Kilmarnock, before his loan spell was ended early following an injury.

On 31 August 2016, Healey joined Newport County on loan until 3 January 2017. He made his debut for Newport on 10 September 2016 in League Two during a 2–2 draw with Cheltenham Town as a second-half substitute in place of Jon Parkin. He scored his first goal for Newport on 24 September 2016 in a 2–1 defeat to Cambridge United. He returned to Cardiff at the end of his loan spell, making his final appearance for Newport in a 2–1 defeat to Wycombe Wanderers on 2 January.

Upon on returning, Healey found himself placed on the bench for Cardiff City for the first time in 3 years against Aston Villa. On 21 January, he scored the winner against Burton Albion, also his first for the Bluebirds, after replacing Junior Hoilett. During his second start for the club against Rotherham United on 18 February, Healey was forced off after suffering a serious knee injury, which ruled him out for up to nine months.

During his recovery from the injury, Healey signed a new two and a half year deal at Cardiff, before making his first team return on 26 December 2017, coming on for Loïc Damour against Fulham. He joined Torquay United on loan in March 2018 for the remainder of the 2017–18 season, scoring six times in eight appearances including a hat-trick during a 4–3 defeat to Guiseley.

On 24 August 2018, Healey joined League Two club Milton Keynes Dons on loan until January 2019. He scored his first goal for MK Dons in an EFL Trophy tie against Peterborough United on 4 September 2018.


</doc>
<doc id="16614958" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16614958" title="Junior Hoilett">
Junior Hoilett

David Wayne "Junior" Hoilett (born 5 June 1990) is a Canadian professional association football player who plays as a winger for Premier League club Cardiff City and the Canadian national team.

He signed for English club Blackburn Rovers at the age of 13, and was loaned to SC Paderborn and FC St. Pauli in the German 2. Bundesliga. He made his Rovers debut in 2009 and played three full Premier League seasons for them before a transfer to Queens Park Rangers. Hoilett spent four years at the Loftus Road club – alternately in the Premier League and Championship – before moving to Cardiff on the expiration of his contract.

Hoilett made his senior international debut for Canada in 2015. He was part of their squad at the 2017 CONCACAF Gold Cup.

Hoilett was born in Brampton, Ontario, and played several sports as a child before settling on football at age 11. In the same year, he travelled the world with his club and gained attention at a tournament in Wales; he turned down Manchester United for Blackburn Rovers as he believed he had more chance of breaking into the first team at the latter. After moving to England, he attended St Bede's Roman Catholic High School in Blackburn. As he was initially unable to earn a work permit to play in the United Kingdom, Blackburn loaned him to German clubs to help him earn one in the future.

Hoilett made his debut for SC Paderborn (on loan) against Kickers Offenbach, coming on as a substitute for Sven Lintjens in a 3–2 victory on 3 February 2008, aged 17. Hoilett's first match in the starting eleven was against 1899 Hoffenheim on 9 March 2008.

Hoilett scored his only goal of his loan campaign on 18 May 2008 against Borussia Mönchengladbach in what would be his final game for the club.

Paderborn were later relegated, ending the 2007–08 2. Bundesliga season in 17th position.

Hoilett was loaned to another German club in the 2. Bundesliga, FC St. Pauli, for the 2008–09 2. Bundesliga season. He made his debut for the Hamburg-based side against SpVgg Greuther Fürth on 22 August 2008. He scored six times during his loan campaign with braces against Alemannia Aachen and Hansa Rostock, as well as individual goals against 1860 München and 1. FC Kaiserslautern. His final game would come in the form of a 1–0 loss against Rot Weiss Ahlen on 3 May 2009. St. Pauli finished the season in eighth position.

In January 2009, Hoilett's home club Blackburn applied for him to receive a work permit for him to play football in England. In the summer of 2009, Hoilett was granted a work permit on appeal, allowing him to continue his fledgling career in England at the Premier League level with Blackburn.

He scored his first and second goals for Blackburn since his full-time return to the club in only his third game, in a pre-season friendly against non-League club Leigh Genesis. He also earned Rovers a penalty in that game. His first competitive goal for Rovers came in a 3–1 League Cup win at Gillingham on 25 August 2009.

Hoilett was involved in Blackburn's dramatic League Cup win against Chelsea on 2 December 2009. Coming on as a second half substitution, he won an extra-time penalty which Benni McCarthy converted to put Rovers 3–2 up, but then missed a golden chance late on to seal victory before Paulo Ferreira equalised in the 122nd minute. However, Hoilett converted the crucial fifth penalty to help Rovers to the 4–3 shootout win and a place in the semi-finals. He then started his first league match on 12 December 2009 against Hull City, playing the full 90 minutes in a 0–0 draw at the KC Stadium. On 25 February 2010, with his contract due to expire in June 2010, Hoilett ended media speculation regarding his future at the club, by signing a new two-and-a-half year deal with Blackburn, keeping him at the club until the summer of 2012. On 9 May, he scored a header in a win over Aston Villa at Villa Park on the final day of the season, although the goal was later recorded as a Richard Dunne own goal. Hoilett made his first Premier League appearance of the 2010–11 season on 21 August 2010 by coming on for Nikola Kalinić in the 84th minute in a 2–1 defeat at St Andrew's against Birmingham City.

He scored his first goal of the 2010–11 season in the 1–0 victory over Queens Park Rangers in the FA Cup third round.

Hoilett scored his first league goal on 23 January 2011 in a 2–0 home victory against West Bromwich Albion at Ewood Park, converting in the 47th minute from a Nikola Kalinić assist. On 12 February 2011, he made his 40th Premier League appearance for Blackburn when he featured against Newcastle United at Ewood Park in a goalless draw, and was replaced at half-time due to a slight hamstring strain by Morten Gamst Pedersen. On 5 March, he scored his third goal of the season in a 3–2 defeat against Fulham in the 65th minute, away at Craven Cottage. He replaced by debutant Rubén Rochina on 82 minutes. His next goal came in the following game, a last gasp equaliser coming from a header against Blackpool at Ewood Park in a 2–2 draw. On 9 April 2011, he scored in the 1–1 draw versus Birmingham City at Ewood Park on half-time, but he unfortunately got injured in the 68th minute, being replaced by Australian Brett Emerton.

He scored his fifth league goal of the season with an individual goal, in a 3–2 win against Wolverhampton Wanderers at Molineux Stadium on the last day of the season. On 11 September 2011, in a game between Blackburn and Fulham, he was involved in a collision with Mark Schwarzer which resulted a head injury for Hoilett. He was eventually stretched off and Schwarzer received a yellow card.
Hoilett scored a controversial second's goal in a match as Blackburn drew with Wigan Athletic 3–3 after teammate Morten Gamst Pedersen seemed to dribble the ball straight from a corner before firing in a low cross for Hoilett to head home from two yards.

In January 2012, Hoilett was named one of the 13 players to watch in 2012 by world football governing body FIFA.

In the 2011–12 season, Hoilett had the most dribbles per game among all Premier League players.

After refusing a contract renewal with Blackburn Rovers, Hoilett joined Queens Park Rangers on 27 July 2012 for a fee decided by tribunal. He signed a four-year contract. He scored his first goal for QPR in a 3–2 League Cup defeat to Reading on 26 September 2012. On 2 March 2013, Hoilett set-up teammate Loïc Rémy and played a crucial part in a 2–1 win over Southampton. A combination of injuries and poor form meant that Hoilett had a frustrating first season at QPR, which resulted in relegation to the Football League Championship.

Hoilett scored his first goal of the 2013–14 Football League Championship season in a 1–1 draw with Huddersfield Town. Four months later, he scored his second goal of the season in a comfortable 3–0 win over AFC Bournemouth at Loftus Road. Hoilett grabbed an assist for the only goal of the game, when he crossed for Bobby Zamora to score in the 89th minute in QPR's 1–0 victory over Derby County at Wembley Stadium in the 2014 Football League Championship play-off Final to gain promotion back to the Premier League after an absence of one season. After failing to agree a new contract with QPR at the end of the 2015–16 season, Hoilett left the club following the expiry of his contract.

Following the appointment of Neil Warnock as manager, Hoilett signed with Cardiff City on 6 October 2016, becoming Warnock's first signing at the club. His debut came on 14 October, against severnside rivals, Bristol City. Hoilett scored his first goal for Cardiff during a 3–2 victory over Huddersfield Town on 19 November 2016. He went on to score one more goal before signing a one-year contract extension in May 2017.

The 2017–18 season saw Hoilett's most productive season, finishing the season with 12 goals, including goals against former club, Queens Park Rangers and a brace against Mansfield Town in the FA Cup, as Cardiff finished 2nd, gaining promotion to the Premier League. Hoilett was offered a new contract following the club promotion.

On 26 June 2018, Hoilett signed a three-year contract in the Welsh capital. He scored his first Premier League goal since 2012 in a 2–1 win over Wolverhampton Wanderers on 30 November, which BBC Sport called a "fabulous first-time effort from 25 yards".

Hoilett was born in Brampton, Ontario. As a child, he captained Canada's representative team at the 2001 Danone Nations Cup in Paris.

Hoilett was eligible to play for Canada or Jamaica at international level. In February 2011, he rejected a call-up from the Canadian national team, stating that he wanted more time to develop his club career before committing to international football. In January 2012, Jamaica Football Federation president Horace Burrell confirmed that he had approached the player's father about Hoilett representing Jamaica. In March 2012, Hoilett told various media bodies that he would consider playing for England if eligible.

Hoilett officially declared for Canada in September 2015, prior to the fourth round of CONCACAF 2018 World Cup Qualifying. He received his first international cap in a 1–1 draw against Ghana on 13 October 2015 at RFK Stadium in Washington, D.C. He officially got cap-tied to Canada after starting for Canada in a 2018 World Cup Qualification match against Honduras. Hoilett was named to Canada's squad for the 2017 CONCACAF Gold Cup on June 27, 2017, and scored his first international goal in the quarterfinal, a 2–1 defeat to eventual finalists Jamaica on July 20.

Hoilett's parents are of Jamaican descent; his father hails from Ocho Rios in Jamaica. Hoilett's brother is Canada U-20 international Jaineil Hoilett. who represented Canada at the 2009 CONCACAF U-17 Championship and Canada's U-20 team against the United States in December 2010.

Queens Park Rangers

Cardiff City



</doc>
<doc id="54988405" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54988405" title="Cameron Coxe">
Cameron Coxe

Cameron Terry Coxe (born 18 December 1998) is a Welsh professional footballer who plays for Premier League club Cardiff City as a defender.

Coxe was born in Merthyr Tydfil and attended Afon Taf High School.

Coxe began his career at Cardiff City, joining the club's youth academy at the age of seven before signing his first professional contract in February 2017. He made his professional debut during a 2–1 defeat against Burton Albion in the second round of the EFL Cup on 22 August 2017.

Coxe has represented Wales at under-19 level. In May 2017, Coxe was named in the Wales under-20 squad for the 2017 Toulon Tournament. After making his debut for the side in the tournament opener against Ivory Coast, Coxe was named in the starting line-up in Wales' second group matche against France but was left out of the final game against Bahrain as Wales were eliminated in the group stage.

Coxe made his debut for the under-21 side on 1 September 2017 in a 3–0 victory over Switzerland. He was named in a preliminary senior Wales squad in May 2018 for a friendly against Mexico but was left out of the final selection.


</doc>
<doc id="3051948" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3051948" title="Matthew Connolly">
Matthew Connolly

Matthew Thomas Martin Connolly (born 24 September 1987) is an English professional footballer who plays as a defender for Premier League club Cardiff City.

Having started his career at Arsenal he went moved to Queens Park Rangers, going on to win the Football League Championship in 2011. It would be the first of three titles in four years, as he won the same division again on loan at Reading in 2012 and Cardiff in 2013, whom he had joined permanently one year previously.

Born in Barnet, London, Connolly attended Nicholas Breakspear R.C school started his career as a youth at Arsenal, eventually making the reserve side. In September 2006 he was made captain of Arsenal's reserves. He made his first-team debut for Arsenal on 24 October 2006, starting a League Cup third round match against West Bromwich Albion.

On 23 November 2006 Arsenal announced he was going on loan to Bournemouth until 2 January 2007. In total he played seven games for Bournemouth (five in League One and two in the FA Cup), and scored his first goal at senior level in a 2–0 win over Nottingham Forest, on 5 December 2006. He returned to Arsenal as scheduled at the start of January 2007, and came on as a substitute for Armand Traoré against Liverpool in the League Cup Quarter-finals on 9 January.

On 9 July 2007 Arsenal announced he would be spending the whole of the 2007–08 season on loan to Colchester United, although he eventually was recalled midway through the loan on 2 January 2008.

The same day, his transfer to Queens Park Rangers was announced, after a lack of first-team opportunities were offered by Arsenal. His debut came on 5 January, in a 1–0 loss to Chelsea in the FA Cup. He scored his first goal for QPR against Blackpool on 16 January 2010.
In the meantime, in November, he received his first call-up to the England U-21 squad, where he joined Arsenal teammate Theo Walcott. His second goal came on 6 March against West Bromwich Albion in a 3–1 win.

During the 2010–11 season, Connolly played a part in QPR's Championship title win playing 36 out of 43 games.

He joined Reading on a loan on 31 January 2012 until the end of the 2011–12 season. He made his debut on 11 February 2012 in a 2–0 win against Coventry City. He only played 6 times during Reading's promotion push which resulted in Reading winning the Championship title.

On 20 August 2012, QPR had accepted a £500,000 bid from Cardiff City for Connolly's services. On 22 August, the deal was completed and Connolly signed a contract that would keep him at the Cardiff City Stadium for 3 years. He made his debut in the Severnside derby against Bristol City on 25 August. He scored his first and second goal for the club in a 3–0 win over Blackpool on 29 September. His third goal came a month later against Burnley, and later scored his fourth against Middlesbrough. Making thirty-six appearances and scoring five goals, Connolly was a key figure as Cardiff won the Championship title, the third time in successive seasons that Connolly has achieved the feat.
He started the Premier League season playing at right back until new signing Kevin Theophile-Catherine became a permanent fixture in the side. Cardiff were relegated after just one season in the top flight. Connolly had then returned to the starting eleven partnering Mark Hudson in a 1–1 draw at Blackburn Rovers.

On 19 March 2015 Connolly joined another Championship side, Watford, on loan until the end of the 2014–15 season, despite having played 26 times for Cardiff that season. Manager Russell Slade stated the deal was a business rather than a footballing decision, with Connolly expressing his surprise at the move. Whilst at Watford, Connolly achieved the feat of being promoted to the Premier League for the fourth time with four different clubs (QPR, Reading, Cardiff and Watford). At Watford Connolly scored once; in a 3–1 win at Nottingham Forest.

Connolly rejoined the Cardiff squad for the 2015–16 season, earning himself a permanent place in the side alongside Sean Morrison. He had become of interest to other clubs during the January transfer window, due to his impressive performances that season. These feats thus earned him a contract extension till 2019 and also the club's Player of the Year award.

"As of 28 August 2018"
Queens Park Rangers

Reading
Cardiff City

Watford

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="19969086" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19969086" title="Loïc Damour">
Loïc Damour

Loïc Damour (born 8 January 1991) is a French professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Cardiff City.

Loïc began his career with his local club US Chantilly before moving to the famous Clairefontaine academy in 2004. While training at Clairefontaine, he also attended the prestigious sports club Athletic Club de Boulogne Billencourt, which also trained current French stars Hatem Ben Arfa and Issiar Dia. After leaving Clairefontaine, he joined RC Strasbourg.

In April 2008, Loïc signed his first professional contract agreeing to a three-year deal keeping him with Strasbourg until 2011. After spending one year in the reserves, he was promoted to the senior squad and was assigned the 26 shirt. He made his professional football debut for Strasbourg on 4 August 2008 in a Ligue 2 match against Montpellier coming on as a substitute.

On 26 October 2009, Damour signed a contract extension with Strasbourg until the year 2013.

On 6 July 2017, following the expiry of his contract with Bourge-Péronnas, Loïc Damour signed for EFL Championship side Cardiff City on a free transfer. He made his debut for the club on the opening day of the 2017–18 season during a 1–0 victory over Burton Albion, as a substitute in place of Lee Tomlin.

Damour is a France youth international having played for the U-16s, U-17s, and the under-18 team. He also played with the France U-19 squad, till 2011. He was captain of the U-16 squad and was a part of the U-17 squad that finished runners-up at the 2008 UEFA European Under-17 Football Championship.

Cardiff City



</doc>
<doc id="21448343" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21448343" title="Stuart O'Keefe">
Stuart O'Keefe

Stuart Antony Alan O'Keefe (born 4 March 1991) is an English professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Premier League club Cardiff City.

He began his career with Ipswich Town, spending six years in the club's youth academy system, but was released as a teenager without making an appearance for the first team. Following his release, O'Keefe joined the academy at Southend United, making his first-team debut for the club in 2008, during a League One match, at the age of 17. In 2010, he completed a move to Championship club Crystal Palace on a free transfer and went on to make over 50 appearances in all competitions for the club during a five-year spell, helping the club gain promotion to the Premier League via the 2013 Championship play-off Final, also spending a brief period on loan at Blackpool in late 2014. In January 2015, he moved to Cardiff City for an undisclosed fee.

O'Keefe was born in Eye, Suffolk. He grew up in the village of Gislingham, Suffolk and attended Gislingham Primary School and later Hartismere School. He is a supporter of Arsenal.

Having attracted the attention of scouts from several clubs whilst playing for local youth team Scole Lads, O'Keefe was invited to train with Norwich City's under-nine team. However, he later signed a youth deal with their East Anglian rivals Ipswich Town, joining the club at the age of nine and playing alongside Jordan Rhodes and Ed Upson in the academy during his time at the club. However, he failed to make an appearance for the first team and was released at the end of the 2006–07 season after Ipswich decided against offering him a scholarship, believing that he would be unable to compete physically at under-18 level. O'Keefe later commented on his release "It was disappointing to be released by Ipswich, especially since I had been there from such a young age, but I always kept believing in myself".

Following his release, O'Keefe spent one month on trial at Aston Villa and impressed the club's coaching staff, including youth coach Gordon Cowans, but was forced to leave the club, who were only willing to offer him a one-year youth contract, after struggling to travel to the Midlands-based club on a regular basis as he continued to prepare for his GCSEs. He was also offered a trial with Nottingham Forest, scoring during a friendly match for the club but O'Keefe again moved on after Forest stalled over offering him a contract as they were only willing to offer him a one-year youth deal.

O'Keefe attended a trial with Southend United in November 2007 at the age of 16, having been recommended to the club by a scout working for Manchester United, and was offered a two-year scholarship just days after arriving at the club. In his first season with the academy, O'Keefe was part of the Southend team that reached the quarter-final of the FA Youth Cup and also featured for the reserves on several occasions. O'Keefe made his first-team debut for Southend on 18 November 2008, at home to A.F.C. Telford United in a 2–0 win in the FA Cup first-round replay as a late substitute in place of Alan McCormack, having signed his first professional contract with the club the week before. He made his debut in League One two months later against Leyton Orient on 20 January 2009 in a 1–1 away draw, again coming on as a substitute in the 84th minute for Alex Revell and nearly scoring late in the match with a volley.

The following week, after one further substitute appearance, O'Keefe was handed his first league start for Southend by manager Steve Tilson against Leeds United at Elland Road on 27 January 2009. However, this proved to be his last appearance for the club during the 2008–09 season. Despite this, O'Keefe was nominated for the League One Apprentice of the Year award, eventually losing out to Carlisle United defender Tom Aldred. The following season, O'Keefe featured more regularly for the first team, making nine appearances in total despite missing two months of the season due to a hernia injury sustained in a match against Millwall on 26 January 2010. Following his departure from Roots Hall, the club's head of youth director Ricky Duncan praised O'Keefe's attitude, stating "Stuart was always very driven and single-minded and he was different to a lot of the other lads in that regard."

On 18 August 2010, O'Keefe signed for Crystal Palace on an initial one-year contract after impressing manager George Burley in a trial match against West Ham United reserves, having been recommended to Burley by his assistant manager Dougie Freedman who had played alongside O'Keefe at Southend. On his signing, Burley described O'Keefe as "a young player with big potential". The transfer was free, although Southend would receive a percentage of any transfer fee for O'Keefe in his first 36 months at Selhurst Park. He made his debut for the club on 20 November 2010 as a substitute in place of Paddy McCarthy during a 3–2 defeat to Sheffield United, later being substituted himself in the 89th minute of the match for Pablo Couñago as Palace pushed for an equaliser. In his first season at Selhurst Park, O'Keefe was a back up player in the squad and made just four appearances during the course of the season. In the 2011–12 season, O'Keefe was given a chance to impress early on in the season in the League Cup, playing five times in the competition during the season as the team reached the semi-final, including starting in the team's 2–1 quarter final victory over Manchester United on 30 November 2011 at Old Trafford. Later in the season, O'Keefe was part of the end of season run in due to injuries and finished the season with 19 appearances for the first team, which saw him offered a new three-year contract with Palace that would last until summer 2015.

During the 2012–13 season, Palace achieved promotion to the Premier League via the Championship play-offs after finishing fifth.O'Keefe featured just five times in the league during the season although he did make two appearances during the play-offs, replacing Wilfried Zaha as a late substitute during the second leg of their semi-final victory over Brighton & Hove Albion, and then playing the majority of the 2013 Championship play-off Final after replacing Kagisho Dikgacoi due to injury after just 17 minutes as Palace claimed a 1–0 victory in extra-time to earn promotion. At the start of the club's Premier League campaign the following season, on 31 August 2013, O'Keefe sealed a 3–1 victory in Palace's first three points of their Premier League return in the 92nd minute at home to Sunderland with a curling 20 yard shot after coming on as a late substitute, the first senior goal of his career and what later turned out to be his only goal for Palace.

At the start of the 2014–15 season, O'Keefe featured in Palace's opening two matches of the Premier League season, defeats to Arsenal and West Ham United, but suffered an ankle injury in the latter which kept him out of the team for two months that saw him omitted from the club's 25-man squad for the Premier League season by new Palace manager Neil Warnock. Lacking match fitness on his return, Warnock made O'Keefe available for a loan move in order to gain playing time and, following a potential loan move to Championship club Charlton Athletic collapsing after they decided to sign Francis Coquelin on loan from Arsenal instead, Warnock stated that he could not "understand how nobody has come in for him".

On 27 November 2014, O'Keefe eventually secured a loan move away from Palace on the final day of the emergency loan window, joining struggling Championship club Blackpool on loan until 1 January 2015, along with Wolverhampton Wanderers defender Kevin Foley. He made his debut on 29 November 2014, starting in a 1–1 draw with Rotherham United, being replaced by Nathan Delfouneso after 56 minutes, and went on to make four appearances for the team before returning to Palace. On his return to Selhurst Park, O'Keefe found himself under a new manager for the fourth time since August 2014, following the appointment of Alan Pardew. Despite being handed a starting spot in Pardew's first match in charge at the club, a 4–0 win over non-League team Dover Athletic in the third round of the FA Cup on 4 January 2015, he was later informed that he was not part of the manager's new plans at the club.

On 28 January 2015, O'Keefe signed for Championship club Cardiff City, who beat off competition from Millwall, for an undisclosed fee on a two-and-a-half-year contract, joining former Palace teammates Danny Gabbidon and Kagisho Dikgacoi at the Cardiff City Stadium. He made his debut against Derby County, having trained with the team for just two days following the completion of his transfer, in a 2–0 loss. He featured in the following two matches but, with heavy competition from Peter Whittingham, Joe Ralls and Aron Gunnarsson, he did not appear for the first team again until 11 April and made a total of just six appearances during the second half of the season for Cardiff.

The start of the following season continued the same trend for O'Keefe as he made just eight appearances during the first five months of the season before returning to the starting line up against Wolverhampton Wanderers on 16 January 2016, in a match that Cardiff went on to win 3–1. O'Keefe's performances saw him establish himself in the first team and his attitude to being left out of the team for long periods drew praise from Cardiff manager Russell Slade who commented "Stuart has got a fantastic attitude, he's a real, real good professional, even when he wasn't in the side he was pushing. [...] some players when they're not in the side get disillusioned and want to move on, but not O'Keefe." He later scored his first goal for the club in a 2–0 victory during a Severnside derby match against Bristol City on 5 March 2016, adding his second one-month later with the winning goal during a 2–1 win over Derby County on 2 April. He finished the season having made 27 appearances for the club in all competitions, the most appearances he has made during a season to date and the first time in his career he made over 20 appearances in a single season.

His impressive form during the second half of the 2015–16 season saw him handed a new contract during the summer, keeping him at Cardiff until summer 2019. After featuring as an unused substitute during the first match of the 2016–17 season, O'Keefe was handed his first appearance of the season in a 1–0 defeat to Bristol Rovers in the first round of the EFL Cup, where he suffered a broken arm in extra-time. He made his return to the team one month later on 25 September, helping Cardiff to their second win of the season during a 2–1 win against Rotherham United. However, with first-team opportunities limited at Cardiff, on 31 January 2017, O'Keefe joined League One club Milton Keynes Dons on loan until 1 May 2017, making his debut for the club as a substitute in place of Chuks Aneke during a 1–1 draw with Bolton Wanderers on 4 February 2017. He made a total of 18 appearances during the loan spell, scoring four times.

On 31 August 2017, O'Keefe joined League One club Portsmouth on loan until the end of the 2017–18 season. At the start of the following season, O'Keefe was sent out on loan for the second successive season, joining Plymouth Argyle.. He returned to Cardiff in January 2019.

After originally beginning his career as a winger, O'Keefe switched to central midfield and was described by former Cardiff City manager Russell Slade as a "hard working, energetic, athletic midfield player." Slade also praised O'Keefe for his determination when not playing regularly in the first team, stating " Stuart will roll his sleeves up, work harder, to try and show his manager and the coaching staff that he's capable of playing in the first team."

Crystal Palace



</doc>
<doc id="12071408" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12071408" title="Gary Madine">
Gary Madine

Gary Lee Madine (born 24 August 1990) is an English professional footballer who plays as a striker on loan at Championship club Sheffield United from Premier League side Cardiff City.

Madine began his career with Carlisle United, where he made his first team debut in 2007. He was sent out on loan in 2009, first with Rochdale and then Coventry City before joining Chesterfield in 2010 on loan. He signed a permanent contract with Sheffield Wednesday in January 2011 for an undisclosed fee.

Madine was born in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear. He attended local secondary school Lord Lawson of Beamish Comprehensive School from 2001–2006. He was originally on the books of Middlesbrough, however he was released and joined Carlisle. Newcastle United players Alan Shearer and Chris Waddle were his heroes growing up.

He progressed through the youth ranks of Carlisle, making his debut at the age of 17 on 3 March 2008, in a 1–0 away win against Nottingham Forest, coming on as a substitute for Danny Graham in the 92nd minute. He went on to make 12 appearances that season, before signing a new three-year contract in June 2008. His first appearances of the following season came in the League Cup, a 1–0 win away to League Two side Shrewsbury Town and a 4–0 defeat to Championship side Queens Park Rangers. He scored his first goal for the club in a 4–1 win in the league against Yeovil Town on 30 August 2008. His next goal came on 7 October in the Football League Trophy, making the score 2–2 after Rochdale had taken a 2-goal lead. The game went to penalties and Madine scored his however Carlisle lost the shoot-out 4–3. He scored on his FA Cup debut as Carlisle drew 1–1 to Grays Athletic at Brunton Park on 8 November. He played in the replay which Carlisle won 2–0, however Carlisle were eliminated in the next round by Crewe. On 20 March 2009, Madine signed on a month-long loan for League Two team Rochdale. He made his debut the next day, setting up Adam le Fondre to score a last-minute winner as Rochdale beat Wycombe 1–0. He made a further two appearances before returning to Carlisle. He scored his first goal of the following season in a 2–0 League Cup win over Championship side Bristol City, helping Carlisle into the third round of the League Cup for the first time since 1976. He made regular appearances before joining Championship side Coventry City on a three-month loan on 19 October 2009. He made his debut on 24 October in a 0–0 draw against West Brom at the Ricoh Arena. He made 9 appearances before returning to Carlisle on 20 January 2010. He made 4 appearances including a Football League Trophy Northern Area Final win on penalties against Leeds United, scoring his penalty in the shoot-out. He then joined League Two side Chesterfield on a month-long loan deal on 12 February. He made 4 appearances before returning to Carlisle. He played and scored in the Football League Trophy Final on 28 March 2010 at Wembley, scoring a consolation goal as Carlisle lost the game 4–1 to Southampton. He began to find form and scored 4 goals in the last six matches of the season, with the goals coming against Brighton, Oldham, Southampton, and in a 2–0 win against league winners Norwich on the final day of the season. He scored on the opening day of the 2010–11 season, in a 2–0 home win against Brentford. His next goal came in a 4–1 win against MK Dons on 21 August. On 28 September, he scored a hat-trick in a 4–0 away win against rivals Hartlepool United. After goals against Notts County and Charlton, he scored 4 goals in a 6–0 FA Cup win against Tipton Town. In November, he scored in back-to-back games against Rochdale and Tamworth. He played his final game for Carlisle on 8 January 2011 in a 1–0 away defeat to Torquay United in the FA Cup. He finished his Carlisle career with 83 appearances and 22 goals.

On 15 January 2011, Madine signed for Sheffield Wednesday, signing a four and a half year contract. He made his debut on 22 January in a 4–0 away loss to Leyton Orient. He scored on his second appearance 3 days later, in a 2–2 draw against Yeovil Town at Hillsborough. He scored again the following game in a 5–3 defeat to Peterborough at London Road. His next goal came in a 4–0 win against Tranmere, and his final goal of the season came in a 2–0 win against Preston North End. He finished the season with 18 goals in all competitions for both Carlisle and Sheffield Wednesday. He scored his first goal of the 2011–12 season in a 2–1 win against Notts County on 20 August 2011. On 27 August he scored a brace as Sheffield Wednesday beat Scunthorpe United 3–2. On 10 September he scored a brace in a 3–1 win against MK Dons, and went on a 4-game goal-scoring run, scoring goals against Stevenage and Yeovil, and a brace against Exeter. He scored his 10th goal of the season in a 3–1 win against Chesterfield. He scored in the following game, this time in a 2–2 draw against city rivals Sheffield United. The game is known as the Steel City derby, and after being two goals down, Wednesday scored two goals in the last 10 minutes including Madine's 85th-minute header to make the score 2–2. This was his first Sheffield derby. He was named Football League Young Player of the Month for September, after scoring 10 goals in 12 games. On 25 October he was sent off for the first time in his career, in a 3–2 loss at former club Carlisle. He broke his toe during a 2–1 win against Tranmere on 19 November and was out for six weeks. He bounced back from his injury by scoring in his second game back during a 2–2 draw against Hartlepool. On 6 March 2012, he scored in a 4–1 win against Bury. Later that month he scored in back to back games in a 2–1 win against Notts County and an injury time equaliser in 2–2 draw against Walsall. On 31 March he scored two goals as Sheffield Wednesday beat Preston 2–0 at home. He scored his first league goal of the 2012–13 season on 9 November, in a 3–1 defeat away to Middlesbrough.

On 27 March 2014, Madine re-joined his former club Carlisle United on loan until the end of the 2013–14 season.

Madine re-joined Coventry City on a one-month loan on 30 October 2014. He scored in the club's 1–0 victory over Colchester United on 22 November after scoring his first goal back in the Football League Trophy tie against Plymouth Argyle F.C. at the Ricoh Arena. He was named the club's Player of the Month by Coventry Telegraph in December, after scoring again in a 2–0 victory over Port Vale at Vale Park on 13 December.

Madine joined Blackpool on loan until the end of the 2014–15 season on 10 February 2015.

On 8 June, Madine signed a two-year deal with Bolton Wanderers . On 26 September, he scored his first goal for Bolton in a 2–2 draw with Brighton & Hove Albion. On 31 May 2017 the club confirmed that Madine had signed a new two-year contract, keeping him at the club until 2019.

On 31 January 2018, Madine joined Cardiff City for an undisclosed fee. His debut came three days later in a 4–1 win over Leeds United.

On 7 January 2019, he joined Championship side Sheffield United on loan for the remainder of the 2018–19 season.

Madine has been convicted of several assaults. In November 2010 he was found guilty of causing actual bodily harm after attacking a man in a pub and sentenced to community service involving 250 hours of unpaid work. He was also ordered to pay £1,500 compensation to his victim and £1,800 in costs. In October 2013 he was jailed for 18 months after being found guilty of causing actual bodily harm and grievous bodily harm in two separate attacks. Madine was released from jail on 20 February 2014 after serving 5 months of his 18-month sentence.

Cardiff City



</doc>
<doc id="50549513" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50549513" title="Omar Bogle">
Omar Bogle

Omar Bogle (born 26 July 1993) is an English professional footballer who plays as a striker for club Portsmouth, on loan from Cardiff City of the .

Bogle is a former England C international. He is known for his diversity in physical style of play, strength and holding the ball to bringing others into play. At the age of 14, Bogle started his career with West Bromwich Albion's youth system before spending another two years at Birmingham City's academy, where he appeared for their reserve team. He then spent one year at Celtic's academy.

Bogle returned south of the border in 2011, where he had a trial with Luton Town, before securing a one-year deal with Hinckley United. During his time there, he caught the attention of Solihull Moors manager Marcus Bignot, he went on to spend the next three years there winning the Conference North player of the year in 2014/2015, also the golden boot award after topping the division's goalscoring charts with 29 goals.

Bogle had been trialled by Championship club AFC Bournemouth in July 2013 and having been tried to sign over a two-year period by the management team at Grimsby Town; at the start of the 2015–16 season he signed a three-year deal with the club and helped Grimsby to win promotion out of the National League, scoring the opening two goals in Grimsby's 3–1 victory over Forest Green Rovers in the 2016 National League play-off Final at Wembley Stadium, seeing Grimsby promoted to League Two after a six-year absence from the Football League, ending the season with 19 goals in all competitions. In November 2016 he was reunited with former manager Marcus Bignot after the latter was appointed as he new Grimsby Town manager. On transfer deadline day in January 2017, Bogle was sold to Wigan Athletic for an undisclosed fee. He moved on to Cardiff City at the end of the season, and spent time on loan at Peterborough United and Birmingham City before joining Portsmouth, also on loan, in January 2019.

Bogle was born in Sandwell, West Midlands. He attended Menzies High School, which later became The Phoenix Collegiate, and started his career with West Bromwich Albion's youth system before moving to the Birmingham City academy, appearing for their reserve team when only just 16 years old. Released by Birmingham, he played in Rangers U17's "Play on the pitch game" in April 2011, scoring a brace against Dunfermline Athletic. Bogle moved to Celtic's academy in September 2011, and played for Celtic Under 19's team in the European Next-Gen Series. He then returned south in March 2012, to pursue regular first team football.

Bogle signed for Conference North side Hinckley United in March 2012. He made his debut on 19 March 2012 in a 1–3 home defeat against Solihull Moors. He scored his first goal for the club with a late winner against Vauxhall Motors on 24 March 2012, Calum Flanagan's throw-in found Bogle with his back to goal 12 yards out, he turned his marker before curling a low shot beyond goalkeeper Scott Tynan into the far corner. On 9 April 2012, he pulled a goal back in the 1–3 home defeat against Bishop's Stortford On 15 April 2012, he scored an equalising goal 11 minutes from time in the 1–1 stalemate at Worcester City, Bogle gathered the ball 20 yards out, before taking it past a Worcester defender, and shooting from the edge of the area low and beyond the beaten Sargeant.

Bogle departed The Knitters in July 2012, having made 8 appearances and scoring 3 goals during his time at De Montfort Park.

On 7 July 2012, Bogle signed for Conference North side with Solihull Moors He made his debut for Solihull on 18 August 2012 in the 3–1 away defeat at Colwyn Bay. On 21 August 2012, he provided an assist and a goal in the 3–0 home tie against Corby Town, within 15 minutes Bogle collected the ball on the left flank and provided a perfect cross which Darryl Knights knocked in the first goal, he then scored his first goal for Solihull Moors, on 27 minutes a corner floated into the box and Bogle steered the ball into the net.

On 24 September 2012, he scored an equaliser in the 37th minute, against Midland Football Alliance side Westfields in the FA Cup second round, Ryan Beswick's long-range free-kick floated through a crowd of bodies for Bogle to head home past the keeper. On 26 September 2012, he scored the 2nd goal in the 1–2 win in the second round FA Cup replay against Westfields, an 89th minute a right wing corner from which Bogle used his strength to force the ball over the line.

Bogle scored a brace in the third round qualifying of the 2012–13 FA Trophy against AFC Fylde on 10 November 2012 in the 18th minute, a cross into the penalty area caused them problems, Bogle and Knights shotes rebounded and eventually fell again to Bogle who side foot into the net from close range; his second came only 3 minutes later, a long throw from Keenah Rosser, which found Bogle who fired the ball low into the left-hand corner of the net, from the edge of the box. Another 1–2 victory in the FA Trophy, this time over Hednesford Town a loose ball in midfield was picked up by Bogle in plenty of space, which gave him time to curl a magnificent unstoppable shot over former Solihull keeper Dan Crane from 25 yards out. He also appeared in the FA Trophy second round against Conference Premier side Wrexham, which ended up a 3–2 defeat for Solihull.

Bogle spent a trial for a week with Championship side AFC Bournemouth in July 2013, where he went on a pre-season training camp in Switzerland and played against FC Zürich, however his trial wasn't progressed any further. He then signed up again with Solihull for the upcoming 2013–14 season.

Three games into the 2014/15 season on 16 August 2014, Bogle scored his first two goals, a loose ball in the 63rd minute caused havoc in the penalty area, the ball came to Bogle who was on hand to smash home; Bogle then slotted home for his second of the game from the penalty spot on 71 minutes, Matt Regan conceded a penalty on the edge of the box and Omar to seal all three points. On 20 December 2014, Bogle scored a hat-trick in the 1–4 demolition of Colwyn Bay, his first came on 10 minutes when a free kick was taken by Ryan Beswick, which Liam Daly duly nodded down in the box for Bogle skillfully rolled the ball into the right hand corner; following a good move out of defence, Colwyn Bay failed to clear in the box and Bogle poked his second of the day; Bogle sweeping on to the loose ball on 36 minutes, after Jack Truelove gave the ball away in his own half, he curled the shot around the stranded keeper for his hat-trick and Moors third. Bogle scored his final league goal for the 2014/15 season, an equaliser in the 2–2 draw with AFC Fylde, a handball in the box from Josh Langley resulted in a penalty from which Bogle scored with virtually the last kick of the game.

While at Solihull Moors Bogle won the Conference North player of the year, he also won the golden boot award after topping the division's goalscoring charts in 2014/2015 with 29 goals.

Bogle joined National League side Grimsby Town on 15 June 2015 on a three-year contract for an undisclosed fee. Prior to him signing, he was admist much transfer speculation with numerous clubs reportedly scouting him, Grimsby had outbid a £10,000 sum by Nuneaton Town which was rejected by Solihull. Grimsby Town also fended off interest from Gateshead to sign Bogle. Milton Keynes Dons and Port Vale in League One were also confirmed in March 2015 to be weighing up a move for him.

He made his full debut with Grimsby on 8 August 2015, in the 2–2 draw at Kidderminster. Bogle scored three days later in the 4–1 home thrashing of Barrow; scoring the second goal on 22 minutes, after a mistake in the Barrow defense, he slotted a right footed shot past the keeper to score his first goal for the club.

On 8 May 2016, Bogle scored the winner in the 2–0 win against Braintree Town; with 10 minutes to go of extra time, Jon Nolan swung in a deep free-kick to the far post and no-one in an Orange shirt had picked up Bogle, with the keeper in no-man's land, Bogle planted a header into the bottom corner; Bogle's goal for Grimsby overturned a 1–0 first-leg deficit, beating Braintree and securing their place in the National League promotion final against Forest Green. Bogle scored the opening two goals in Grimsby's 3–1 victory over Forest Green Rovers in the 2016 National League play-off Final at Wembley Stadium, seeing Grimsby promoted to League Two after a six-year absence from the Football League.

Bogle made his League Two professional debut with Grimsby on 6 August 2016, coming off the subs bench in the opening game of the season, a 2–0 win over Morecambe. His first goal came on his full debut on 16 August 2016, in the 3–2 defeat at Colchester; blasting a left footed shot from 18-yards in the second-minute of stoppage time.

Bogle won the PFA Fans' League Two Player of the Month award for August and September 2016.<ref name="Sky11095/10597908"></ref> He was also named in the EFL Team of the Week in August, September, October (twice), and November 2016.

In January 2017, Championship side Rotherham United had 3 separate bids turned down by Grimsby for Bogle, a further bid by the club was also rejected. Bogle was also subject of an enquiry by fellow Championship sides Leeds United and Brentford. Premier League sides Hull and Swansea joined the race, along with Championship pair Norwich and Reading for his signature.

On 31 January 2017, Bogle signed for Championship side Wigan Athletic on a two-and-a-half-year deal for an undisclosed fee; this included a number of additional clauses, if Wigan maintained their Championship status in the current season, return to the Premier League, also a sell-on clause.

Bogle made his first appearance for the club on 3 February 2017 in the 1–0 home defeat against Sheffield Wednesday, coming off the subs bench to replace Will Grigg in the 67th
minute. His first goals came when he made his full debut on 7 February 2017, the game finishing a 2–2 draw at home to Norwich City; his first came from a header from a Michael Jacobs corner to equalise on 62 minutes, then 6 minutes later he scored from a free-kick from the right side edge of the area into the far corner. Bogle scored his third and final goal of the 2016-17 Championship campaign from the penalty spot in a 2-1 defeat at Queens Park Rangers.

On 17 August 2017, Bogle signed for Championship side Cardiff City on a three-year deal for an officially undisclosed fee, although Cardiff manager Neil Warnock later stated that the transfer fee was £700,000. His debut came five days later in a 2–1 loss over Burton Albion in the EFL Cup. Making his first league start for "The Bluebirds", Bogle scored his first goal for the club in a 3–1 win over Ipswich Town on 31 October, shortly followed by his second 5 days later against Bristol City, before being sent off in the Severnside Derby. Upon his return he scored the third goal in a 3–1 win over Norwich City.

On 1 February, Bogle joined Peterborough United on loan until the end of the 2017–18 season. He scored his first goal for Peterborough in a 2-1 win over Walsall on 27 February 2018.

On 7 August 2018, Bogle joined Birmingham City on a season-long loan. He made his debut as a second-half substitute in a 1–0 defeat away to Middlesbrough, and made three league starts during August. However, as Che Adams began to develop a productive partnership with Lukas Jutkiewiczboth had ten goals by mid-DecemberBogle became increasingly peripheral, losing his place on the bench to youngster Beryly Lubala. According to manager Garry Monk, not having spent pre-season with Birmingham had made it difficult for Bogle; "he was just so eager to score a goal when he first came in and that probably distracted from the other work that needed to be done." He worked hard to regain a place on the bench, and scored his first goal for the club on 26 December with a shot from distance to secure a 2–0 home win against Stoke City.

Bogle's loan at Birmingham was cancelled by mutual agreement on 28 January 2019, and later that day he joined Portsmouth of League One on loan until the end of the season. He scored on his debut the next day in a defeat away to Luton Town, and produced an equaliser against Doncaster Rovers on his Fratton Park home debut in his next match.

Bogle was selected and called up to the England C team in 2014, to play against Estonia U23's. On 18 November 2014, Bogle opened the scoring after just four minutes and nodded down for Harry Beautyman to notch number two. He was substituted midway through the second half but not before seeing another shot blocked off the line; he left the pitch to a loud applause from the crowd.

Bogle primarily plays as a central striker, he can dribble, hold the ball up, scores headers. he also has the ability to play with both his left foot and his right, a great skill for footballers.

Omar Bogle's chant by Grimsby Town fans is a version of the song Tender by the band Blur.

Grimsby Town

Cardiff City




</doc>
<doc id="3813692" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3813692" title="Mark Harris">
Mark Harris

Mark Harris may refer to:





</doc>
<doc id="20401808" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20401808" title="James Waite">
James Waite

James Waite may refer to:



</doc>
<doc id="58338514" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58338514" title="Ciaron Brown">
Ciaron Brown

Ciaron Maurice Brown (born 14 January 1998) is an English professional footballer who plays as a defender for Scottish Premiership club Livingston, on loan from Cardiff City.

Brown enjoyed a stint at amateur side Bedfont Sports before moving to National League South club Wealdstone. He made over 50 appearances for the Ruislip-based club, scoring twice. 

After a successful trial period, Brown was signed by Cardiff City on 9 January 2018. He was an unused substitute in Cardiff's 3–1 defeat to Norwich City in the EFL Cup. 

On 24 January 2019, Livingston confirmed the signing of Brown on loan from Cardiff. He played his first league game on 23 February 2019, playing 63 minutes against Kilmarnock.

 


</doc>
<doc id="12331795" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12331795" title="Lee Tomlin">
Lee Tomlin

Lee Marc Tomlin (born 12 January 1989) is an English professional footballer who plays as a striker or as an attacking midfielder for Peterborough United, on loan from Premier League club Cardiff City.

Tomlin was born in Leicester, Leicestershire. He started his career with the youth system of Leicester City in 1996 before joining Rushden & Diamonds's youth system in 2005. In October 2005, he became Rushden's youngest ever first-team player when he came on as a substitute for Drewe Broughton in the 74th minute. Throughout the rest of the season he made several more substitute appearances, but his first start came in November 2005, in an FA Cup first round replay against Halifax Town. He made 21 appearances in League Two in the 2005–06 season.

Before the 2006–07 season, Tomlin attracted the attention of several big clubs and he earned a trial with Liverpool. Throughout the season, he made more starts and became more of a regular in the Rushden starting eleven. He scored his first goal for the club against Weymouth, the match after Paul Hart was sacked, in the 21st minute. He immediately followed this with another goal, this time against Altrincham in the FA Cup fourth qualifying round. He scored six goals during the season, playing as a forward and on both wings. Tomlin joined Southern League Premier Division club Brackley Town in October 2007 on a one-month loan, making two appearances.

Tomlin switched to left midfield for the 2009–10 season, under his influential manager Justin Edinburgh whom he credited for his development and achieving his move to the Football League. Following the end of the season a six-figure bid for Tomlin was rejected from another Blue Square Bet Premier club believed to be Crawley Town and Rushden confirmed he would be offered a new contract.

Tomlin signed for League One club Peterborough United for an undisclosed fee on 6 August 2010. He went on to assist the team gain promotion with a hard working display against Huddersfield Town at Old Trafford, which The Posh won 3–0.

He continued to develop his reputation at Championship level and on 20 August 2011, he scored his first professional hat-trick in a game against Ipswich Town, helping Peterborough to a 7–1 win.

Tomlin beat five defenders to score in Peterborough's last game of the 2012–13 season, away to Crystal Palace, but a 3–2 defeat confirmed their relegation back to League One.

On 31 January 2014, Tomlin signed for Middlesbrough on loan for the remainder of the 2013–14 season with a view to a permanent move. On 18 February, it was announced that he had signed permanently on a three-and-a-half-year contract. Tomlin made his debut on 22 February in a 0–0 draw against Leeds United, coming on as a substitute for Kei Kamara. After a run of fine performances, most notable in Middlesbrough's 2–0 victory over Manchester City in the FA Cup, Tomlin was named Championship Player of the Month for January 2015.

On 4 August 2015, Tomlin signed for Premier League newcomers Bournemouth on a three-year deal for a fee of around £3.5 million. He made his debut against Liverpool, coming on for Joshua King. He scored his only goal for Bournemouth in the 2015–16 season, a penalty against Birmingham City in the FA Cup.

Tomlin signed for Championship club, Bristol City on a season-long loan, on 27 January 2016. He later made his debut in a goalless draw against Birmingham City on 30 January. Tomlin went onto score 6 goals in 18 appearances, including goals in a 6–0 win over Bolton Wanderers and a 4–0 win over Huddersfield Town.

During the summer, Tomlin opened talks with Bristol City and took part in a medical on 4 July.

On 13 July 2017, Tomlin joined Championship rivals Cardiff City on a three-year contact for an undisclosed fee, making his debut for the club on the opening day of the 2017–18 season during a 1–0 victory over Burton Albion.

On 31 January 2018, Tomlin joined Nottingham Forest on loan in a swap deal with Jamie Ward moving to Cardiff on loan in return. He scored his first goal for Forest in a 1–1 draw with Reading on 20 February 2018..

On 18 December 2018, it was announced that Tomlin was training with Peterborough United and would return to the club on loan from 1 January 2019 until the end of the season. However, the move was delayed due to paperwork issues. The transfer was eventually completed on 8 January.

Tomlin was capped two times by the England national C team in 2009.

Peterborough United

Cardiff City

Individual



</doc>
