<doc id="2482563" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2482563" title="Kasper Schmeichel">
Kasper Schmeichel

Kasper Peter Schmeichel (; born 5 November 1986) is a Danish professional footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for club Leicester City and the Denmark national team. He is the son of former Manchester United and Danish international goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel.

Schmeichel began his career with Manchester City, but he had loan spells with Darlington, Bury and Falkirk before he made his Manchester City debut. Although Schmeichel appeared to have made the City number 1 jersey his own at the start of the 2007–08 season, the emergence of Joe Hart resulted in Schmeichel being loaned to Cardiff City. The signing of Republic of Ireland international Shay Given in January 2009 meant that Schmeichel fell even further down the pecking order at City, and in August 2009, he was allowed to link up with former manager Sven-Göran Eriksson at Notts County. He spent only one season with the Magpies as, while it was a very successful one for the club and the player himself, changes to the club's financial position made his departure necessary and his contract was terminated by mutual consent. He joined Leeds United in May 2010, but again, his tenure at the club would only last one season before he was the subject of a transfer to Leicester City, where he would again work under Eriksson. Schmeichel has gone on to play over 300 competitive games for Leicester, winning the Championship in the 2013–14 season and the Premier League in 2015–16.

He played 17 games for the Denmark national under-21 team. Schmeichel was called up to the Denmark national team for the first time against Iceland on 13 May 2011, and was part of their squad at UEFA Euro 2012, but did not make his senior debut until 2013.

Born in Copenhagen, Schmeichel joined Manchester City in September 2002 on a long-term contract, which covered schoolboy, scholar and professional terms. He joined League Two side Darlington on a loan deal in January 2006, where he made his professional first team debut against Peterborough United at the 96.6 TFM Arena on 14 January 2006. Darlington won the game 2–1, with Schmeichel conceding a goal to Peterborough striker James Quinn. He gained his first clean sheet three days later against Grimsby Town. He made two further appearances before returning to Manchester City.

One month after returning to Manchester City he was loaned out again, this time to Bury in February, where he made 15 appearances in a three-month loan spell. He returned to Bury for a further three months the following season.

Schmeichel joined Scottish Premier League side Falkirk on loan from January 2007 until the end of the 2006–07 season. He was named man of the match against Rangers on 18 February 2007. He also saved a Craig Beattie penalty in a 1–0 win over Celtic on 18 March 2007. He revealed in May he would have liked his loan at Falkirk extended, and the club expressed an interest in signing him.

Schmeichel made his Manchester City debut against West Ham United in August 2007. He played against City's rivals and his boyhood team Manchester United on 19 August 2007 and kept a clean sheet in City's 1–0 home win. Schmeichel saved a penalty from Arsenal's Robin van Persie on 25 August 2007 at the Emirates Stadium. Despite City losing 1–0 to Arsenal he was named man of the match. He played the first seven of Manchester City's games in the 2007–08 Premier League, keeping clean sheets against Manchester United, West Ham, Aston Villa and Derby County, conceding only five goals.

He signed a new four-year deal with City in September 2007. This was then followed up with an agreement to go on a one-month loan with Championship side Cardiff City on 25 October 2007. He made his debut for Cardiff on 27 October 2007 in a 1–1 draw with Scunthorpe United. He was named 2007 Danish Under-21 Talent of the Year.

Towards the end of the loan spell, Schmeichel requested that he would be allowed to stay on at Cardiff for a longer period and on 22 November, the loan spell was extended until the new year, with manager Sven-Göran Eriksson stating that he could possibly stay at the club for the rest of the season providing Manchester City do not suffer an injury crisis. After Eriksson named Joe Hart as the number one goalkeeper at Manchester City, however, Andreas Isaksson requested a transfer. This meant that Eriksson would not allow Cardiff to keep Schmeichel after his initial loan period ended on 2 January. On 31 December, Eriksson threw Cardiff a lifeline by opening talks for Schmeichel to stay at Ninian Park. Schmeichel would be allowed to stay for two more matches should Isaksson not move until late in the January transfer window. Schmeichel had stated he would like to play for Cardiff again in the future. Schmeichel, however, returned to Eastlands the day after his initial loan expired.

He joined Coventry City on loan until the end of the season on 13 March. Towards the end of the season, his father, Peter Schmeichel, commented during a TV interview that his son was not happy at Manchester City and was set to leave following the end of the season.

Despite wanting to leave, Schmeichel returned to the City of Manchester Stadium at the end of the season and changed to the number 16 shirt. He repeatedly stated that he wanted to leave City and regretted signing a four-year contract.

On 16 November, Schmeichel entered a game as a substitute after Joe Hart injured his ankle in the 14th minute. City went on to a 2–2 result with Hull City. In December 2008, Schmeichel played his last game for Manchester City in a UEFA Cup match against Racing de Santander. On 4 January 2009, he stated in the "Daily Mail" that he was ready to quit the club after falling down the pecking order at Eastlands.

On 14 August 2009, Schmeichel signed for League Two side Notts County in a deal that is believed to have broken the club's previous transfer record. The transfer reunited Schmeichel with his former Manchester City manager, Sven-Göran Eriksson, who had recently been appointed director of football for Notts. He was the highest paid player at the club, earning £1 million annually. He made his debut on 22 August and kept a clean sheet in the side's 3–0 win against Dagenham & Redbridge. In September 2009, Schmeichel almost scored with an audacious overhead kick against Morecambe when he came up from a corner late on in the game.

A fine string of performances in October earned Schmeichel the Player of the Month award. During Schmeichel's stay at The Magpies, the club conceded only 0.67 goals per League 2 match (29 goals conceded in 43 league appearances). Schmeichel's clean-sheets-to-game-ratio at Notts County was an impressive 55.8 percent (24 out of 43 league appearances). On 27 April, Schmeichel and Notts County secured the 2009–10 League Two trophy and promotion for the Football League One with a 5–0 win against already relegated Darlington. Shortly before the game, it was announced that Notts County agreed to release Schmeichel at the end of the season despite having four years left on his contract. The reasoning behind this was financial: Schmeichel earned a reported £15,000 per week, having been signed during the brief ownership period of high-spending Munto Finance in the summer 2009. Schmeichel agreed to forgo all his future wages, something which chairman Ray Trew described as "a huge concession by such a young man".

On 27 May 2010, having been linked with both Premier League and Bundesliga clubs, Schmeichel signed a two-year contract with Leeds United, joining the club on 1 July 2010. In the 2010–11 season squad number announcement, Schmeichel was given the number 1 shirt at Leeds. After much speculation during the pre-season over who would be Leeds' first choice goalkeeper for the forthcoming season, it was Schmeichel who was given the nod ahead of Shane Higgs. He made his debut for the club on Saturday 7 August 2010 in Leeds' opening Football League Championship match against Derby County. Despite Leeds losing 2–1, Schmeichel put in an impressive performance, making several crucial saves during the match. After a string of impressive games for Leeds, Schmeichel was nominated for the August Championship Player of the Month award, but lost out to Queens Park Rangers winger Adel Taarabt. Schmeichel, however, did win Sky Sports Championship Player of the Month award for August.

After picking up a tendon injury in his foot, Schmeichel missed the game against Swansea City and was ruled out of Leeds' next few games. While out injured, Schmeichel appeared on "Soccer AM" as one of the guests on the show. After just under two months out, Schmeichel returned to the Leeds starting line-up against Cardiff City. He was set to play against Coventry City on 6 November, but due to the birth of his first child the night before, he missed the game.

On 8 January 2011, Schmeichel helped Leeds earn a 1–1 draw against Arsenal in the FA Cup Third Round match at the Emirates Stadium. After the match, Arsenal captain Cesc Fàbregas commented that Schmeichel should have received the match ball for his performance. Although Leeds lost the replay 3–1, Schmeichel produced another impressive display (nearly scoring himself via a header) and he was subsequently named player of the FA Cup Third Round.

On 20 June 2011, Leeds announced they had accepted an undisclosed bid for him from Leicester City. With Schmeichel wanting to stay at Leeds for the remainder of his contract, he admitted that the decision to sell him was a real shock. Leeds claimed that they felt they wanted to strengthen the goalkeeping position to replace Schmeichel due to the poor goals against ratio.

On 27 June 2011, Schmeichel was officially confirmed as a Leicester player, signing a three-year deal for an undisclosed fee that reunited him for a second time with his former Manchester City and Notts County manager, Sven-Göran Eriksson.

In the first month of the season, Schmeichel was shown a seemingly needless red card in the 79th minute of Leicester's away game to Nottingham Forest on 20 August 2011 after receiving two yellow cards for "unsporting conduct". He received the first card for moving the ball from the penalty spot as Forest's Lewis McGugan was about to take a kick, then received his second for throwing the ball away after the spot kick was successfully converted. After the match, Schmeichel apologized, claiming his back was turned to the referee so did not know he had received the first of the yellow cards. "I didn't know I had been booked as I had my back to the ref otherwise I would never have done that," he said on his personal Twitter page. Despite this, Schmeichel's performances for Leicester quickly began earning him plaudits, with his then manager Sven-Göran Eriksson comparing him with England number 1 goalkeeper Joe Hart, and teammate and former England international Paul Konchesky describing him as "one of the best [goalkeepers] he has ever played with". A short-distant reaction save against Portsmouth in November 2011, in particular, earnt Schmeichel praise and was described by Portsmouth manager Michael Appleton as "one of the best saves I have seen in a very long time". and by Leicester manager Nigel Pearson as "a world-class, outstanding save and was very important at that point of the game".

Schmeichel played a total of 52 games overall, making 17 clean sheets and saving four penalties. His performances in the 2011–12 season earned him the club's Player of the Year and Players' Player of the Year awards on 30 April.

Schmeichel's form in the first half of the 2012–13 season surpassed that of the previous season, keeping 12 clean sheets in 28 games, the most in the league as the Foxes sat second in the table, such performances earning him links with La Liga giants Real Madrid and also leading to his first senior Denmark cap. A particular highlight was a spectacular save against Blackburn Rovers in February. On 16 April 2013, he made his 100th Leicester appearance in a 3–2 win over Bolton Wanderers. Schmeichel's performances earned him a place in the 2012–13 Championship PFA Team of the Year, alongside club captain Wes Morgan.

During the 2013–14 season, Schmeichel kept nine clean sheets during a 19-game unbeaten run spanning from December to April to help guarantee Leicester promotion from the Championship with six games to spare. Schmeichel's high quality performances once again lead to him being courted by some of world football's giants, with both Manchester United and Milan being linked with moves for the Danish international during the January transfer window.

In March, TV footage appeared to support Schmeichel's claim that he had scored what would have been the first goal of his career, when Leicester equalised, in injury time, against Yeovil Town. However, the match officials ruled that his header had not crossed the line and the goal was officially credited to Chris Wood, who followed up to put the ball in the net.

At the end of the 2013–14 season, it was announced that Schmeichel had signed a four-year contract extension until the summer of 2018 with Leicester.

Schmeichel remained the first choice goalkeeper for Leicester's return to the Premier League, including playing the full 90 minutes in the 5–3 victory against Manchester United on 21 September 2014. In December 2014, Schmeichel suffered a broken metatarsal in training, ruling the Dane out for at least a month. While he was out, Leicester signed goalkeeper Mark Schwarzer as a replacement. Schmeichel eventually returned from injury on 21 March 2015, and beat Schwarzer to play in the 4–3 defeat to Tottenham Hotspur. Clean sheets against Swansea City and Burnley as Leicester won four out of five games in April earned Schmeichel a nomination for the Premier League Player of the Month award. After securing Premier League safety following a goalless draw with Sunderland on 16 May, Schmeichel stated his belief that manager Nigel Pearson should win Manager of the Season and that Pearson is the best manager Schmeichel has played for. Pearson, however, was sacked in the off-season.

Under Pearson's replacement, Claudio Ranieri, Leicester sat top of the table on Christmas Day. Despite their great start, the team did not keep a clean sheet in their first nine games, prompting Ranieri to offer to buy the squad pizza for their first. The team finally managed their first clean sheet of the season in their tenth game, against Crystal Palace. The team improved defensively, and Schmeichel kept his 12th clean sheet of the season in the reverse fixture against Palace on 19 March. On 2 May 2016, he won the Premier League title at 29 years of age, the same age and same calendar day when his father won Manchester United's first such title in 1993. On both occasions, the respective teams (Manchester United and Leicester City) clinched the titles by nearest rivals (Aston Villa and Tottenham Hotspur) not winning. The Schmeichels became the only biological father and son to win the Premier League, as well as being in the same position to do so.

Despite rumors of a move away after playing a crucial role in Leicester City's title in the 2015–16 season, on 6 August 2016, Schmeichel signed a new five-year contract until 2021. Schmeichel made his first appearance of the season in FA Community Shield against FA Cup winners, Manchester United, the match ended in a 2–1 defeat for the reigning champions. On the opening of the Premier League, Schmeichel continue his role in the goal ahead of new signing, Ron-Robert Zieler against newly promoted Hull City. Schmeichel was beaten twice as Hull City went on to beat the champions 2–1. After missing three games in September, including a midweek EFL Cup tie against Chelsea, with a minor groin injury, Schmeichel sustained a hand fracture in the first half of a Champions League match at F.C. Copenhagen on 2 November. Despite the injury, Schmeichel finished the game, seeing out a 0–0 draw by making a late save of Andreas Cornelius for his fourth Champions League clean sheet in four matches. After undergoing surgery two days later, Schmeichel was expected to miss six weeks of action, with Zieler taking his place in goal.

On 24 February 2017, reports emerged alleging that Schmeichel was among several teammates who met with chairman Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha following their 2–1 Champions League defeat at Sevilla on 22 February, which led to manager Claudio Ranieri being sacked. Schmeichel denied the claims, describing them as "very hurtful".

In Leicester's first Champions League campaign, Schmeichel saved a penalty in each leg of the last 16 tie with Sevilla – from Joaquín Correa and Steven Nzonzi respectively – as the Foxes advanced 3–2 on aggregate.

On 26 August 2017, Schmeichel saved a Romelu Lukaku penalty away at Manchester United in the 53rd minute, with the score at 0–0. Leicester would go onto lose the game 2–0. On 31 March 2018, Schmeichel saved a penalty kick in a 2–0 away win over Brighton, the same number his father saved during his time in the competition (three out of 21 Premier League penalties saved). On 14 April 2018, Schmeichel suffered an ankle injury in the 86th minute in a 2–1 home loss against Burnley, resulting in Schmeichel missing Leicester's final five games of the 2017–18 Premier League season.

Schmeichel witnessed the helicopter crash on 27 October 2018 that killed five people including Leicester owner Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha.

While at Manchester City, Schmeichel was called up for the Denmark national under-19 team in August 2004, and made his international debut in a 0–0 draw with Northern Ireland on 2 September 2004. He went on to play eight under-19 internationals until March 2005, competing with Kenneth Stenild and Michael Tørnes for the goalkeeping spot. He was called up for the under-20 team in October 2005, but did not play for the team until October 2006, during his time at Bury. The day after his under-20 debut, Schmeichel was asked to train with the senior Denmark team and was called up as a replacement for injured Theis Rasmussen in the under-21 squad.

Schmeichel was one of the leading players in the team, and was named Danish under-21 Talent of the Year in November 2007, following three clean sheets in the previous four under-21 games. He played a total 17 under-21 internationals in a row from March 2007 to October 2008, racking up seven clean sheets.

Following his strong showings for Manchester City in the early 2007–08 season, it was reported on 23 August 2007 that The Football Association (FA) were investigating Schmeichel's international status, to see if there was any chance of him foregoing his Danish international status in order to play for England. Schmeichel, however, stated that he would only ever play for Denmark.

Schmeichel was called up to the Danish senior team on 13 May 2011 for the first time for the match against Iceland, but remained an unused substitute. On 29 May 2012, he was called up for UEFA Euro 2012 as a third goalkeeper after it became clear that Thomas Sørensen would miss the tournament due to an injury sustained against Brazil. Schmeichel made his senior debut in a 3–0 friendly match defeat to Macedonia at the Philip II Arena on 6 February 2013.

On 15 October 2013, Schmeichel had his first ever senior level game in his native Denmark, when he held an easy clean sheet in Denmark's 6–0 win against Malta in the last 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifier. Denmark were eventually runners-up in the group, finishing six points behind Italy, but they did not progress to the play-offs for the finals as they were the lowest-ranked team of the nine runners-up.

On 5 March 2014, Schmeichel received his third cap for Denmark in their 1–0 friendly defeat against England at Wembley Stadium. Despite defeat, Schmeichel pulled off a string of impressive saves earning plaudits from the media as well as England manager Roy Hodgson.

Schmeichel was selected for the Danish squad for the 2018 FIFA World Cup, where he started in three group stage matches. His clean sheet in the opening match contributed to a Man of the Match award and helped Schmeichel set a new record for minutes without conceding a goal for Denmark, surpassing his father's record. During the Round of 16 match against Croatia, Schmeichel was named Man of the Match after saving a penalty-kick taken by Luka Modrić in extra-time and two penalties during the subsequent shootout, although his opposing counterpart Danijel Subašić saved three penalties in that shootout to eliminate Denmark.

Schmeichel is the son of former Denmark international goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel. Having spent most of his childhood living in England due to his father's playing career, Kasper is a native speaker of both Danish and English, the latter of which he speaks with a Northern-English accent. He attended Hulme Hall Grammar School in Cheadle Hulme, Stockport, Greater Manchester, and he also attended Saint Julian's School in Portugal while his father played for Sporting CP in Lisbon. When Alex Bruce, son of Kasper's father's former Manchester United teammate Steve Bruce, joined Kasper at Leeds United, the move saw the two players re-unite after both had previously played football together on the streets as children after school.

Schmeichel has two children: a son, Max (born 2010) and a daughter, Isabella (born 2012).

Schmeichel signed an ambassadorial deal with Precision Goalkeeping on 17 August 2010 which will include the release of the "Schmeichology" Goalkeeping Range.

Notts County

Leicester City

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="3677063" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3677063" title="Danny Simpson">
Danny Simpson

Daniel Peter Simpson (born 4 January 1987) is an English professional footballer who plays as a right back for Premier League club Leicester City.

A product of the Manchester United academy, during his development Simpson played on loan for Sunderland, Ipswich Town and Blackburn Rovers in England, and Royal Antwerp in Belgium. He was on loan at Newcastle United for six months before signing for them on a permanent basis in January 2010, and after four years joined Queens Park Rangers on a free transfer in June 2013 for a year, before joining Leicester City the following season.

Simpson was born in Eccles, Greater Manchester, to a Jamaican father and English mother. Simpson played for Parkwyddn JFC in Eccles as a youth before being picked up by Manchester United. He is a product of the Manchester United youth system, having come up through the ranks into the reserve squad in 2005.

Simpson made his debut against South African team Kaizer Chiefs on 18 July 2006, which the Reds won 1–0. Manager Alex Ferguson claimed that Simpson looked "anything but a player making his first start for Manchester United".

In early January 2006, he was sent on loan, along with three other United youths, to the Belgian Second Division club Royal Antwerp for the remainder of the season, to gain match experience. Simpson also spent the first half of the 2006–07 season at Antwerp before returning to United in January 2007.

On 25 January 2007, he joined Sunderland on loan for the rest of the season. The loan move saw him link up with fellow Manchester United player Jonny Evans. He won the Championship title with Sunderland that season.

Simpson returned to United at the start of the 2007–08 season and signed a new contract in September 2007 that would keep him at the club until 2010. He made his first competitive appearance for United on 26 September 2007 in the 2–0 League Cup loss to Coventry City, and soon after made his Premier League debut on 6 October 2007 against Wigan Athletic at Old Trafford, coming on as a 30th-minute substitute for the injured John O'Shea. He set up the fourth goal with a well flighted cross for Wayne Rooney. The match ended with a 4–0 win to United. His European debut came on 23 October 2007, when he came on as an 80th-minute substitute for Ryan Giggs against Dynamo Kyiv. His first European start was in the reverse fixture against Dynamo Kyiv on 7 November 2007; United won the game 4–0.

On 21 March 2008, Simpson signed a loan deal with Ipswich Town. With Gary Neville on the verge of returning to the Manchester United first team, United manager Alex Ferguson decided it was best for Simpson to get as much first team football as possible, something that would be quite hard to come by at Old Trafford with both Gary Neville and Wes Brown ahead of Simpson in the pecking order.

On 4 August 2008, Simpson signed for Blackburn Rovers on a season-long loan deal. Simpson made his Blackburn debut on 27 August 2008, playing in Rovers' 4–1 win over Grimsby Town in the League Cup Second Round. His Premier League debut for Blackburn Rovers came almost three weeks later, on 13 September 2008, in a 4–0 defeat at home to Arsenal.
With the exception of Blackburn's League Cup Fifth Round defeat by Manchester United, which he was forced to miss because of a clause in his loan agreement, Simpson was ever-present for Blackburn during their League Cup and FA Cup campaigns. He also played in 11 out of the 14 league matches for which he was eligible prior to Christmas 2008, although he was named on the bench for the other three. After Christmas, Simpson only played in one further league match, another 4–0 defeat to Arsenal, and in early May 2009, with his first team opportunities limited at Blackburn, the loan agreement was terminated early and he returned to train with Manchester United.

On 14 August 2009, Simpson joined Newcastle United on loan until January 2010, making his debut in a 1–0 victory over Sheffield Wednesday at St. James' Park. He scored his first goal for Newcastle against Peterborough United on 7 November 2009.

Following the completion of the loan deal, Newcastle made a bid to keep Simpson on a permanent basis. An undisclosed fee, reported as being in the region of £750,000, was agreed between Newcastle and Manchester United and Simpson signed a three-and-a-half-year contract on 20 January 2010.

He played a solid part in Newcastle's promotion to the Premier League, winning his second Championship title in the process, while forming a right flank partnership with January signing Wayne Routledge. Towards the end of the season, he "played through the pain" with what he considered a small ankle injury. He only realised the full extent of the ankle injury at the end of the season, and he had an operation to correct it. He was out for three months, including the first month or so of Newcastle's season. Simpson returned to action from his injury lay off, playing two reserve games in October. He made his first start of the new season in Newcastle's 2–1 victory over West Ham United, replacing James Perch at right back. Simpson kept his right-back spot with consistently strong performances, forming a strong partnership with Joey Barton on the right flank.

On 20 September 2011, Simpson scored a curler in Newcastle's 4–3 win over Championship side Nottingham Forest in the third round of the League Cup.

On 10 December 2011, Simpson started alongside James Perch at center back in place of the injured Steven Taylor and Fabricio Coloccini for Newcastle's 4–2 defeat at Norwich City. He had played at right back for the beginning of the season.

On 4 January 2012, Simpson started for Newcastle during their 3–0 win against Manchester United, and produced a fantastic saving clearance off the line against his old club on his 25th birthday.

After his contract with Newcastle expired at the end of the 2012–13 season, Simpson signed a three-year deal with Championship club Queens Park Rangers on 27 June 2013. He scored his first goal for QPR in a League Cup tie against Exeter City on 6 August 2013. He made 36 Championship appearances for QPR as they earned promotion via the play-offs.

On 30 August 2014 signed a three-year contract for fellow promoted team Leicester City for an undisclosed fee. Simpson made his Leicester debut in a 2–0 defeat against Crystal Palace off the bench on 27 September 2014. However, he didn't make his second appearance for the club until 7 December against Aston Villa, as he often struggled to get into the side ahead of regular right back Ritchie De Laet. Simpson made 14 appearances overall for Leicester in the 2014–15 season.

In the 2015–16 season, under the new management of Claudio Ranieri, De Laet was again preferred ahead of Simpson to begin with. However, following a 5–2 defeat by Arsenal, Ranieri changed his full backs bringing Simpson in for De Laet helping to shore up Leicester's defence, as Simpson was considered a much more defensive full-back than De Laet and "rarely ventured forward". Simpson became a regular for the rest of the season, though was sent-off in the return fixture against Arsenal as Leicester went down to a late 2–1 defeat, but the Foxes held on to win their first ever Premier League title.

Simpson has a daughter, who was born six weeks prematurely in mid-2011.

On 20 May 2015, Simpson was found guilty of assaulting his then-girlfriend and mother of his child Stephanie Ward on 28 December 2014. He was sentenced to 300 hours of community service. On 12 May 2016, his sentence was reviewed in light of press-intrusion into his community service, and replaced with a 22:00 to 06:00 curfew for 21 days.

Sunderland

Newcastle United

Queens Park Rangers

Leicester City



</doc>
<doc id="48388682" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48388682" title="Ben Chilwell">
Ben Chilwell

Benjamin James Chilwell (born 21 December 1996) is an English professional footballer who plays as a defender for club Leicester City and the English national team.

Chilwell was born in Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire and attended Redborne Upper School and Community College. He is a product of the Leicester City academy and won their Academy Player of the Year award at the end of the 2014–15 season.

After featuring for the club in pre-season under new manager Claudio Ranieri, Chilwell was given the number 30 shirt ahead of the 2015–16 season. He made his professional debut on 27 October 2015 in the club's League Cup match against Hull City. Chilwell played the entire match as Leicester lost 5–4 on penalties following a 1–1 draw after extra time.

On 19 November 2015, Chilwell joined Championship side Huddersfield Town on a youth loan until 3 January 2016. He made his debut in the 2–0 home loss to Middlesbrough nine days later.

On 28 July 2016, Chilwell signed a new contract with the club until 2021. On 26 December 2016, in the 2016–17 season, he made his Premier League debut in a 0–2 home defeat to Everton. Chilwell received praise for his performance. He made 19 total appearances across the campaign, including two in the UEFA Champions League, and scored his first career goal on 18 May 2017 in a 6–1 home loss to Tottenham Hotspur.

Chilwell was sent off on 13 January 2018 for two yellow cards within five minutes of each other in a goalless draw at Chelsea.

Along with his Leicester clubmate Demarai Gray, Chilwell was called up from the under-21 side to the full England squad in September 2018 for a friendly match against Switzerland. He made his debut in this match on 11 September, as a 79th-minute substitute for Danny Rose in a 1–0 home win. Upon taking to the pitch in the match at the King Power Stadium he became the first England player to debut at his club ground since Paul Scholes at Old Trafford in 1997. Chilwell made his first start on 12 October in a 0–0 draw away to Croatia in the UEFA Nations League A.

Chilwell's father is from New Zealand, and emigrated to England in 1993 three years prior to Chilwell's birth.



</doc>
<doc id="48578661" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48578661" title="Çağlar Söyüncü">
Çağlar Söyüncü

Çağlar Söyüncü (; born 23 May 1996) is a Turkish professional footballer, who plays as a defender for Premier League side Leicester City and the Turkish national team.

Joining SC Freiburg in 2016 Bundesliga summer transfer window, he is the first Turkish footballer who made a transfer to Bundesliga directly from TFF First League, the second highest professional level football league of Turkey.

Making his senior national team debut in 2016, Söyüncü is the first Altınordu S.K. player called up to Turkey national football team after 78 years, since Sait Altınordu, the iconic player of the club, was selected in 1937. He is also the first player called up to national team from any İzmir-based football clubs since 1997.

During the 2015–2016 season he was linked with Beşiktaş J.K., Galatasaray S.K. and Sevilla FC but 20 years old Turkish national selected the Bundesliga because he thought it was better choice for his career and his improvement

On 24 May 2016, Söyüncü joined German side SC Freiburg, which was promoted to the top flight competition of Germany for the 2016–17 season. He made his Bundesliga debut on week 1 encounter away against Hertha Berlin which ended 2–1 for Berlin outfit, on 28 August 2016. He was linked with Lille OSC, AS Roma, and Villarreal CF during the mid-season transfer window of 2016–17 season. Manchester City was also reported to be interested in Söyüncü.

On 9 August 2018 Söyüncü joined Premier League side Leicester City on a five year contract, subject to a successful work permit application.

In November 2015, he was called up to Turkey national football team by coach Fatih Terim, following the injury of central defender Serdar Aziz. On 17 November 2015 Söyüncü was a reserve for the a friendly game against Greece but stayed on the bench and did not actually get a chance to play. On 18 March 2016, he was called to national squad for friendly games against Sweden and Austria, to be held on 24 March 2016 in Antalya, Turkey and on 29 March in Austria, respectively.

Substituting Ozan Tufan in the dying minutes of friendly game against Sweden, Söyüncü earned his first senior national team cap on 24 March 2016, Thursday. Earning his 2nd cap, he was on starting line-up at friendly with Russia on 1 September 2016, ended 0–0.

Possessing leadership attributes, Söyüncü is good at playmaking, dribbling and timing. Standing at 1.87 m, he is strong in the air. In 2016, he stated that his idol is Spaniard defender Carles Puyol and he admires German international Mats Hummels.



</doc>
<doc id="4413434" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4413434" title="Wes Morgan">
Wes Morgan

Westley Nathan Morgan (born 21 January 1984) is a professional footballer who plays as a defender for and is captain of Premier League club Leicester City and formerly the Jamaica national team.

Morgan spent the majority of his career with his boyhood club, Nottingham Forest, playing 402 matches and scoring 14 goals. He was their longest-serving player when he transferred to Leicester City in January 2012. Morgan became Leicester's captain later that year, and has gone on to play over 200 matches in all competitions for them, captaining them to the Championship title in 2014 and their first Premier League title two years later. He was the first Jamaican player to score in a UEFA Champions League game.

Born and raised in England, Morgan chose to represent his ancestral Jamaica at international level, making his debut for them in 2013. He was part of their teams that competed in two Copa América tournaments and finished runners-up at the 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup.

Morgan was born in Nottingham, Nottinghamshire. Having been rejected by Nottingham Forest's near neighbours Notts County at the age of 15, he went to study business at South Notts College while playing semi-professionally in central midfield for Dunkirk in the Midland Football Alliance. His performances were tracked by non-League teams and Forest, who took him as an apprentice while he continued studying. There was no transfer fee, but Dunkirk received two Forest kits. Their clubhouse has his Forest and Leicester shirts on the wall.

In February 2003, with manager Paul Hart considering him close to a first-team breakthrough after his reserve performances, Morgan was loaned to Kidderminster Harriers of the Third Division. He made his professional debut on 1 March, playing the full 90 minutes of a 1–3 loss to Scunthorpe United at Aggborough, deflecting a 25-yard Peter Beagrie shot for the first goal. Morgan totalled five appearances for the Worcestershire side, scoring his first goal two weeks after his debut, heading to confirm a 2–0 victory at Cambridge United.

Hart wanted Morgan to lose weight before joining the first team, which became a priority as the team had lost several players after losing in the last season's play-offs. He made his debut at left-back on 12 August 2003 away to Port Vale at the age of 19; after a goalless draw, Forest won a penalty shoot-out to advance to the second round of the League Cup. Four days later he made his First Division debut in a 3–0 loss to Reading; Hart considered him the man of the match. On 18 October, he scored his first goal for Forest, heading Eoin Jess' cross to finish a 6–0 win over bottom team Wimbledon at the City Ground. He totalled 32 games across the season, also scoring an equaliser on 3 December in the home game against Ipswich Town, and was sent off twice over the campaign.

In the 2007–08 campaign, Morgan missed only four games all season, as he helped Forest finish second in the league and gain promotion from League One to the Championship. His only goal of the season came in a 2–0 victory at Tranmere Rovers, while Forest kept a season-record 24 clean sheets.

Morgan found it hard adapting to life back in the Championship during the first half of the 2008–09 season, with Forest languishing in the relegation zone by Christmas. Following the dismissal of Colin Calderwood on Boxing Day 2008, and the arrival of Billy Davies soon after, Morgan and the Forest defence looked far more solid as the season progressed which eventually led to the Reds retaining their Championship status. At the end of the 2008–09 season he had made a total of 274 appearances in all competitions, including 255 starts.

October 2011 saw Wes Morgan make his 400th appearance for Nottingham Forest against Hull City in a match in which he was also handed the captaincy.

On 20 January 2012, Nottingham Forest announced they rejected a bid for Morgan from local rivals Leicester City.

On 30 January 2012, Morgan joined East Midland rivals Leicester City for an undisclosed fee believed to be in the region of £1 million. As a result of his performances towards the end of the 2011–12 season, he was awarded with the Leicester City captaincy ahead of the 2012–13 season. His impressive performances early on earned him a nomination for Championship Player of the Month for September.

Leicester won the 2013–14 Championship, in which he missed only one game. Afterwards, the club used a clause in his would-be expired contract to keep him for another season; he eventually signed a new three-year deal.

In the Premier League for the 2014–15 season, Morgan scored his first goal of the season in a 4–3 defeat to Tottenham Hotspur on 21 March 2015, and another in 3–0 win over Newcastle on the 5 May. On 19 April 2015, Morgan was selected in the "Football Manager Team of the Decade" at the Football League Awards.

Morgan kept his place for the 2015–16 season, playing in every minute of all 38 Premier League matches, one of only 4 players to achieve that accolade (including teammate Kasper Schmeichel) in that season. On 3 April 2016, he scored the only goal against Southampton, despite feeling ill. On 1 May, he equalised with a header in a 1–1 draw with Manchester United at Old Trafford, and the next day Leicester won the title, with Morgan becoming the first Jamaican to win a Premier League medal. After captaining Leicester City to the title, Morgan was included in the Premier League PFA Team of the Year, alongside teammates Jamie Vardy, N'Golo Kanté and Riyad Mahrez. He also became the third outfield player in Premier League history to play every minute of a title-winning season after Gary Pallister in 1992–93 and John Terry in 2014–15.

Manager Claudio Ranieri said "Wes Morgan is Baloo off "The Jungle Book". He is a big gentle bear who looks after all the lads. He does not speak so much but when he does speak, everybody listens. He is the perfect captain. I never knew anything about him before I came here. But I watched all the matches, I watched how solid, strong and intelligent he was".

On 14 March 2017, he scored the first goal in Leicester's 2–0 win against Sevilla, contributing to a 3–2 aggregate score which allowed the club to qualify for the quarter-finals of the UEFA Champions League. This also made him the first Jamaican player to score in a Champions League game.

On 1 September 2013, Morgan was called up to the Jamaican squad for the first time. He made his debut in a 0–0 draw against Panama at the Estadio Rommel Fernández in Panama City on 7 September 2013. Morgan captained the "Reggae Boyz" for the first time in the 3–1 defeat to Canada on 9 September 2014.

Morgan was part of the Jamaican squad invited to the 2015 Copa América in Chile. He played every minute of their campaign, in which they were eliminated in last place in their group. Weeks later, he was again an undisputed part of their team at the 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup in the United States and Canada, helping them to a first final, which was lost 3–1 to Mexico at Lincoln Financial Field in Philadelphia.

Morgan has four children from three previous relationships. 

He is a co-owner of Blue Ink, a tattoo studio in Leicester.

Nottingham Forest

Leicester City

Jamaica

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="4358321" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4358321" title="Jonny Evans">
Jonny Evans

Jonathan Grant Evans (born 3 January 1988) is a Northern Irish professional footballer who plays as a defender for club Leicester City and the Northern Ireland national team.

Evans was born in Belfast and started his career at Greenisland FC, where he was spotted by Manchester United scouts. He progressed through Manchester United's football Academy to play in several foreign tours in the summer of 2006. He then went on loan to Royal Antwerp and had two spells with Sunderland. He made his Manchester United first team debut in the 2007–08 League Cup, becoming a regular first-team squad member the following season. Evans is the second most decorated player in Northern Irish football history with 10 major trophies.

Evans was scouted while playing for Greenisland FC, the same club that his brother Corry and Craig Cathcart played for before moving to Manchester United. At the age of nine, he was invited to attend the Manchester United Centre of Excellence in Belfast, before being invited for a trial in Manchester a year later. Rule changes within The Football Association at the time meant that clubs were limited to players who lived within an hour and a half of the club, so Evans' opportunities were limited. However, the Evans family soon relocated to Manchester, allowing Jonny to train with Manchester United full-time. Evans progressed through Manchester United's Academy, featuring in two of the club's three games during the 2006 summer tour of South Africa, as well as domestic friendlies against Celtic and Preston North End. Evans also made a surprise appearance in the Amsterdam Tournament against Ajax. Evans spent the first half of the 2006–07 season on loan at Manchester United's Belgian feeder club Royal Antwerp, alongside fellow youngsters Darron Gibson, Danny Simpson and Fraizer Campbell.

In December 2006, Evans agreed to join Sunderland on loan until the end of the 2006–07 season, with Manchester United and Antwerp team-mate Danny Simpson joining on a similar deal in the January transfer window. The pair helped Sunderland clinch the Football League Championship title, with Evans winning the club's "Youth Player of the Year" award at the end of the season. Although manager Roy Keane was hopeful of re-signing Evans on loan following promotion to the Premier League, it was confirmed in June 2007 that Evans would be staying at Manchester United to push for a place in the first team.

On 4 January 2008, Evans rejoined Sunderland on loan for the second time, and was immediately drafted into the first team squad. Evans played the full 90 minutes in his first game, losing 3–0 to Wigan Athletic in the FA Cup. Evans was criticised for granting Wigan the second goal of the game, for which he lost the ball on the edge of his own box, resulting in a deflected own goal by Paul McShane. His half-season with Sunderland was generally successful, however, and the team avoided relegation.

Evans made his Manchester United debut on 26 September 2007 against Coventry City in the Football League Cup. Unfortunately, his debut ended in a 2–0 defeat. He then appeared as a late substitute for Gerard Piqué in a UEFA Champions League match at home to Dynamo Kyiv on 7 November 2007 to secure Manchester United's qualification to the knockout stage of the competition. He subsequently made his first Champions League start on 12 December 2007 against Roma.

Evans made his league debut for United against Chelsea on 21 September 2008, filling in for Nemanja Vidić who was unavailable due to suspension. The game ended 1–1. In December 2008, Evans made two substitute appearances for Manchester United at the FIFA Club World Cup, including one in the final after Nemanja Vidić was sent off shortly after half time. Evans continued to deputise throughout the rest of the season, appearing in a number of league games and in the League Cup final.

At the beginning of the 2010–11 football season, Evans became a regular fixture in the United team, partnering Nemanja Vidić in the centre of defence in the absence of the injured Rio Ferdinand. On 19 March 2011, Evans injured Bolton Wanderers and United States international Stuart Holden with a tackle which left Holden out for six months which eventually got worse and caused him to be slidelined for 22 months. Despite Evans being given a straight red card for the tackle, Manchester United went on to win the game 1–0 with a Dimitar Berbatov goal.

Before the start of the 2011–12 season, Evans was handed the number 6 shirt after Wes Brown was transferred to Sunderland. On 14 August, he wore his new shirt number for the first time in United's opening day 2–1 win at West Bromwich Albion, he came on for the injured Nemanja Vidić in the 52nd minute at The Hawthorns. On 23 October, he was sent off in United's 6–1 defeat against Manchester City after bringing down Mario Balotelli in a last-man challenge. Evans made his 100th appearance for the "Red Devils" on 30 November, playing the full 120 minutes as United lost 2–1 to Championship side Crystal Palace in the League Cup quarter-final. On 18 March 2012, he scored his first goal for United after opening the scoring in the 5–0 league win at Wolverhampton Wanderers. Evans missed the final three games of the season with a foot injury.

Having undergone surgery to repair an ankle injury at the end of last season, Evans was unable to start pre-season training until early August, but there was speculation that he might be playing Manchester United's second game against Fulham. Evans scored his second goal for the club in a 3–0 away win at Newcastle United on 7 October 2012, thumping home a header from a Robin van Persie corner kick. On 23 October, Evans scored his first goal in the UEFA Champions League and first at Old Trafford in a 3–2 victory over Braga. He scored the equalising goal at 2–2, scrambling home from a corner kick. Evans netted his third goal of the season on 24 November 2012 in a 3–1 win, heading in the equaliser against Queens Park Rangers at Old Trafford from a corner. On 21 December 2012, Evans signed a new contract with United which will keep him at the club until June 2016. Evans scored his third league goal of the season and fourth overall on Boxing Day in a 4–3 win against Newcastle United, tapping home after Javier Hernandez's shot had been saved by Tim Krul.

On 4 March 2015, Evans was involved in a suspicious spitting altercation with Papiss Cissé in a 1–0 win over Newcastle United. He denied the ensuing charge from the FA and said: "I would like to make it clear that I did not spit at Papiss Cisse. Having woken up this morning, I am shocked to have seen the media coverage from last night's match." However he was still banned for 6 games on 7 March, Papiss Cissé for seven.

Evans signed for Premier League club West Bromwich Albion for an undisclosed fee on 29 August 2015.He made his debut for the club on 12 September 2015 in a 0–0 draw against Southampton. On 2 January 2016, Evans scored his first West Brom goal in a 2–1 victory over Stoke City. On 15 May 2016, before the final game of the season, Evans received Players'Player of the Season award of West Bromwich Albion on his primary campaign for the club. 

He had to wait a long time for his next goal, which came in a 3–1 win over Watford on 3 December 2016. His next goal came in a 2–1 loss against Swansea on the final game of the season.

In July 2017, following the departure of club skipper Darren Fletcher to Stoke City, Evans was confirmed permanent captaincy by head coach Tony Pulis. He scored his first goal of the season on 30 September 2017 in a 2–2 draw against Watford, an alike header of the one he scored ten months earlier against the same opponent. His second goal of the season was against Brighton at home on 13 January 2018, which brought his side's first league win across 5 months and 20 games.

In June 2018, Leicester City activated his relegation release clause in his contract with West Bromwich Albion with £3.5m. He signed a three-year contract. He made his Leicester debut in a 2–0 victory over Wolverhampton Wanderers on 18 August 2018.

Despite having not yet made his senior debut for Manchester United, Evans was called up to the Northern Ireland squad for the first time in September 2006, making his debut in the memorable 3–2 victory over Spain. Evans has since retained his place in the squad and has made over 60 appearances. On 28 March 2009, Evans scored his first international goal in a 3–2 win over Poland in the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA), volleyed home from close range. 

On 28 May 2016, Evans was included in Northern Ireland's final 23-man squad for UEFA Euro 2016 by national team manager Michael O'Neill. This was the first time Northern Ireland had ever been involved in the finals of the competition, and their first major tournament since the 1986 FIFA World Cup. Northern Ireland eventually reached the last 16, being knocked out by Wales in a 1–0 defeat. Evans participated in all four games Northern Ireland played in this tournament.

His second international goal came 8 years after the first one on 4 September 2017, scoring a backward header against Czech Republic. The game finished a 2–0 victory to his side and consolidated their good form in the 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA). Northern Ireland reached the playoff stage of the qualification,seeing the best chance of returning to the competition for the first time in 32-year. However in the first leg they suffered from a controversial penalty decision made by Romanian referee Ovidiu Hategan, he deems Evans' young brother Corry handled the ball and booked him for that so he would miss the second leg, where the ball clearly struck Corry's shoulder. Northern Ireland manager Michael O'Neill claimed it was the worst decision he had ever seen in a game he had been involved in. The game ended as a 1–0 defeat to them and a goalless draw in the second leg three days later means they were officially knocked out of the competition. Evans nearly equalized the aggregate score in the injury time where his header already beat Switzerland goalkeeper Yann Sommer, but was cleared off the line by defender Ricardo Rodriguez, who converted that controversial penalty in the first leg.

Evans' younger brother, Corry, is a footballer who plays as a midfielder for Blackburn Rovers.

Evans was born in Belfast, Northern Ireland. attended Belfast High School in Newtownabbey, Northern Ireland, before moving to Ashton-on-Mersey High School in Sale once he had been signed by Manchester United. He holds nine GCSEs, all A* or A grades.

On 19 December 2007, Evans was arrested in connection to an alleged rape that occurred at the hotel where Manchester United's Christmas party was held. On 8 March 2008, it was reported that Evans would not be prosecuted for any offence.

On 1 June 2013, Evans married Helen McConnell, a MUTV reporter, at Clough Presbyterian Church. The couple have a daughter named Lottie, born on 15 May 2014.

Sunderland

Manchester United



</doc>
<doc id="40685637" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40685637" title="Demarai Gray">
Demarai Gray

Demarai Remelle Gray (born 28 June 1996) is an English professional footballer who plays as a winger for club Leicester City.

Gray came through the youth system of Birmingham City, for whom he made his Football League debut as a 17-year-old in October 2013. In two-and-a-half seasons, he made 78 appearances across all competitions, including 51 starts in the Championship, and scored 8 goals. Gray signed for Leicester City in January 2016, and was a member of their 2015–16 Premier League-winning squad.

He has represented England from under-18 to under-21 level.

Gray was born in Birmingham, where he attended Frankley High School and played for Cadbury Athletic's junior teams. He joined Birmingham City's Academy as an under-11, and took up a two-year scholarship in July 2012. In a 2013 interview, Gray assessed his strengths as "pace, dribbling and technique", felt he needed to "score more goals", described himself in three words as "bubbly, calm and happy", and named Nathan Redmond as the biggest influence on him since joining the club.

After impressing Birmingham manager Lee Clark in training, he was named in the squad for the Championship match against Millwall on 1 October 2013, and made his senior debut as a 91st-minute substitute for Jesse Lingard in a 4–0 win. He made his first start on 2 November, in a 1–0 league defeat at home to Charlton Athletic. Gray signed his first professional contract, of two-and-a-half years, on 9 December. Days after his inclusion together with academy teammate Reece Brown in a "Top 10 Football League stars of tomorrow" feature on the "FourFourTwo" website, Gray scored his first senior goal. Entering the League match at home to Blackburn Rovers on 19 April 2014 as a second-half substitute with Birmingham 4–1 down, he received a pass from Federico Macheda and shot low into the corner to score the final goal of the match. His performance over the season earned him the Academy Player of the Season award for 2013–14.

Gray performed well in 2014–15 pre-season, and the management suggested he was showing increased maturity. He started the first two matches of the season, but for the remainder of Clark's tenure as manager, Gray was used more as substitute than starter. Against Leeds United in September, he was denied a penalty and booked for diving when apparently fouled by Giuseppe Bellusci; both managers thought it the wrong decision. The following week, his first goal of the season gave Birmingham a 2–0 lead at top-of-the-table Norwich City, but he became unwell in the second half. Norwich scored while Birmingham were attempting to substitute him, and the match ended 2–2.

He made his first start under new manager Gary Rowett in the 1–0 win away to Rotherham United on 22 November, and soon established himself as the left-sided wide midfielder in a 4–2–3–1 formation as Rowett regularly named an unchanged starting eleven. On his tenth league start, Gray scored three times in the first half of the match at home to Reading on 14 December, which ended 6–1. It was his first hat-trick since his under-14 days, and Rowett praised not only his clinical finishing but also his work off the ball and tracking back to cover in defence. His performances during December earned him the Football League Young Player of the Month award.

Clark had expressed concern that the club's financial difficulties would force the sale of players such as Gray, and the player was offered a two-year contract extension. A £500,000 bid from Premier League club Crystal Palace was rejected in September, scouts regularly watched the player, and media reports linked him with clubs including Liverpool, Newcastle United and Tottenham Hotspur. The club turned down a series of offers, the highest reported as £5 million, from Championship club AFC Bournemouth in the January 2015 transfer window. In a statement issued when the window closed, they said that "none of [those offers] reflected the ability and potential of the player", and expressed their pleasure at having retained his services.

With loanee Lloyd Dyer available as an alternative, Rowett used Gray more sparingly, suggesting that his reduced effectiveness was a normal part of a young player's learning curve: the player needed to learn how to impose himself on a match despite increased attention from the opposition. The "Birmingham Mail" suggested that Gray's potential as a matchwinner should not be ignored. His solo goal on 11 April, in which he ran the length of the pitch to score the winner against Wolverhampton Wanderers, was his first since the Reading match and earned him the club's Goal of the Season award. According to "The Guardian", "It was not so much the 18-year-old's pace that impressed as his persistence in running at and then pressurising Wolves full-back Scott Golbourne into error, and the certainty with which he then slid the ball past the Wolves goalkeeper". He finished the season with 43 appearances in all competitions, of which two-thirds were as a starter, and won the club's Young Player of the Season award.

After many months of negotiation, Gray signed a new three-year contract with the club in July 2015. At the player's insistence, a release clause was included in the terms. He went into the new season feeling "stronger as a player, physically and mentally", and produced some fine performances, as in a 2–0 win at Leeds in October, when he took advantage of confusion in the defence to score what proved to be the only goal of his Birmingham season, and in a goalless draw at Preston North End in December. He nearly marked his last appearance for the club, as a substitute in a 2–0 win at home to Milton Keynes Dons on 29 December, with a farewell goal. When the ball broke to him, "with a single silky touch and devastating burst he was in on goal, ready to put the icing on an outstanding team performance. He gave the goalkeeper the eyes, created the gap at the near postand proceeded to hit the upright."

In the early part of the season, Gray had asserted that "right now what's key for my development is playing games here", but that "I will know when it's my time". When Rowett selected Viv Solomon-Otabor to start ahead of Gray against MK Dons "with January coming up", it was clear that his time had arrived.

Premier League club Leicester City activated the release clause in Gray's contract, reported as £3.7 million, and he signed a four-and-a-half-year contract on 4 January 2016. He made his debut on 10 January, away to Tottenham Hotspur in the third round of the FA Cup. He started the match, assisted a goal by Marcin Wasilewski, and "showed glimpses of the pace that will cause Premier League defences problems" in the 2–2 draw at White Hart Lane. Six days later he made his first appearance in England's top flight, as an 85th-minute substitute for Marc Albrighton in a 1–1 draw at Aston Villa.

Consistency of team selection as Leicester maintained their position at the top of the league meant Gray's chances of first-team football were limited, but teammate Danny Simpson highlighted the contribution of the squad players. Former Sky Sports journalist Alex Dunn wrote that Gray "proved to be incredibly adept at killing time when coming on for Leicester as a late substitute". He made the assist for Jamie Vardy's stoppage-time goal that secured a 2–0 win at Sunderland, and against Swansea City, his run from deep, cross and parried shot set up a goal for Albrighton. He had made ten appearances, all as a substitute, by 2 May when Leicester were confirmed as champions.

On 3 November 2018, a week after the death of Leicester City's owner and chairman Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha in a helicopter crash, Gray scored the winning goal against Cardiff City. He celebrated by removing his jersey to show an undershirt bearing the words "For Khun Vichai" written on it and then running to the away end of the ground.

Gray was called up for an England under-18s training camp in November 2013. He made his debut at that level on 18 February 2014, playing the whole of a 4–0 win against their Belgian counterparts in a friendly match at St George's Park. Two weeks later, he was involved in England's goal as they lost 2–1 to Croatia in the first match of a double-header. He received his first call-up to the under-19s for a friendly against Germany in September 2014, and made his debut as a second-half substitute. An ankle injury forced Gray's withdrawal from the squad for the 2015 European Under-19 Championship first qualifying round, but he was able to play his part in the elite round. He started the first match, against Denmark, and was involved in England's second goal in a 3–2 win, when his near-post flick was deflected over the line by a Danish player. The Football Association (the FA) credit Gray with the goal, although UEFA record it as an own goal. A substitute in the second group match, a win against Azerbaijan, he returned to the starting eleven for the final group match against France, but a 2–1 defeat meant England failed to qualify for the finals.

After taking part in a joint training camp for the under-20 and under-21 teams, Gray was included in Aidy Boothroyd's under-20 squad for the 2015 Toulon Tournament. Starting the opening match on the left of a three-man attack, Gray gave England an 8th-minute lead with a shot from , but Morocco twice took the lead before Chuba Akpom secured a 3–3 draw for England. Gray was a second-half substitute in the next match, a win against Ivory Coast. He made his third appearance as England lost to Mexico, but took no part in the last group game or the third-place play-off, and later admitted he had felt tired after a full season of league football and had not been at his best. He and Birmingham teammate Reece Brown were called up for the under-20s' first matches of the 2015–16 season, a double-header against the Czech Republic. In the first match, both Brown and half-time substitute Gray scored as England won 5–0; in the second, despite what the FA's website called a "hugely influential" attacking performance by Gray, they lost 1–0.

After Nathan Redmond withdrew through injury, Gray was called into the under-21 squad for European Championship qualifiers in November 2015. An unused substitute for the first match, a goalless draw away to Bosnia and Herzegovina, he was not included in the matchday squad for the second, a 3–1 win at home to Switzerland. Gray made his under-21 debut on 26 March 2016, in the reverse fixture against Switzerland, a 1–1 draw. His run led to England's goal, scored by Akpom, and according to head coach Gareth Southgate, "it was a super debut. He was a threat all night and I think the work he did at the goal was exceptional but he also put a real shift in for the team and did his work off the ball."

On 9 September 2018, Gray was called up for the full England squad for a friendly match against Switzerland.

Leicester City

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="47253367" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47253367" title="Kelechi Iheanacho">
Kelechi Iheanacho

Kelechi Promise Iheanacho (; born 3 October 1996) is a Nigerian professional footballer who plays for club Leicester City and the Nigeria national team. He has made appearances for Manchester City, as well as the Nigeria squad that won the 2013 FIFA U-17 World Cup and the Nigeria U-20 team at the 2015 FIFA U-20 World Cup. Iheanacho was called up to the Manchester City senior squad for the 2015–16 season.

Iheanacho was born in the state of Imo. As a youth, he represented Taye Academy in Owerri, the capital city of Imo. His performances for Nigeria in the 2013 FIFA U-17 World Cup led to interest from clubs in Europe; teams following his progress included Arsenal, Sporting Clube de Portugal and Porto. In December 2012, Iheanacho travelled to England to discuss a move to Manchester City. He signed a pre-contract agreement with the club, stating his intent to formally sign for City on his 18th birthday in October 2014. In the interim, he returned to Nigeria. As the year drew to a close, the Confederation of African Football (CAF) named him the Most Promising Talent of the Year for 2013 at the CAF Awards.

Iheanacho joined Manchester City's Academy on 10 January 2014. Before the 2014–15 season, City visited the United States on a pre-season tour, and although still not formally a City player, he joined up with the squad. He played and scored in the first match of the tour, a 4–1 win against Sporting Kansas City, and scored again against Milan in a 5–1 win. After the conclusion of the tour, Manchester City arranged for Iheanacho to train with the Columbus Crew until mid-October.

Delays in obtaining a work permit meant Iheanacho was unable to play in England until February 2015. He made his debut at under-19 level in a UEFA Youth League match against Schalke 04, but sustained an injury after only 11 minutes. After his recovery, he began to represent Manchester City at both youth and under-21 level in the latter part of the season. He played in the FA Youth Cup final, where he scored, but ended on the losing side after Chelsea claimed a 5–2 aggregate victory. The following week, he scored the only goal as Manchester City beat Porto in the final of the 2014–15 Premier League International Cup.

In July 2015, Iheanacho was included in City's pre-season tour team in Australia. On the tour, he set up the first goal for Raheem Sterling and scored the second goal in the win against Roma in the 2015 International Champions Cup. He also set up Sterling for the fourth goal in City's 8–1 victory against the Vietnam national team. In City's last preseason game, against VfB Stuttgart, he came on as a substitute, scoring late on in a 4–2 defeat. Due to his impressive pre-season, Iheanacho was promoted to the Manchester City senior squad.

On 10 August 2015, Iheanacho was included in a first-team matchday squad for the first time in a competitive fixture, however he remained an unused substitute in their 3–0 win at West Bromwich Albion in their first game of the Premier League season. Nineteen days later, he made his competitive debut, replacing Raheem Sterling for the final minute of a 2–0 win against Watford at the City of Manchester Stadium. He scored his first competitive goal on 12 September, replacing Wilfried Bony in the final minute in a match away to Crystal Palace and scoring the only goal of the game.

Iheanacho scored his first career hat-trick on 30 January 2016 against Aston Villa in the fourth round of the FA Cup, also setting up City's fourth goal, scored by Raheem Sterling. The following month, he was put in City's UEFA Champions League squad at the expense of the injured Samir Nasri. During February, Iheanacho scored against Tottenham Hotspur in a 2–1 home defeat for City.

Iheanacho's next goals came on 23 April 2016, where he scored twice against Stoke City in a 4–0 victory. He followed this up with a Champions League semi-final substitute appearance on 26 April 2016. Five days later, on 1 May 2016, he scored two again, albeit in a 4–2 defeat at the hands of Southampton.

On 10 September 2016, Iheanacho started in the Manchester derby. He recorded an assist and his first goal of the season in a 2–1 win for City. Four days later, Iheanacho came off the bench to score the final goal in City's 4–0 home win in the Champions League, against Borussia Mönchengladbach. This was his first European goal for Manchester City. Three days after the 4–0 win, Iheanacho scored the second goal, also assisting the third, in City's game against Bournemouth. That goal took his tally in the Premier League to 10, allowing him to join an exclusive list of players to have scored 10 Premier League goals before the age of 20. This list includes players such as Wayne Rooney, Ryan Giggs, Nicolas Anelka, Michael Owen and Romelu Lukaku.
In October 2016, Iheanacho was nominated for the FIFA Golden Boy award, which was eventually won by Bayern Munich's midfielder Renato Sanches. Previous winners of the award include teammates Raheem Sterling and Sergio Agüero, and five-time Ballon d'Or winner Lionel Messi.

Iheanacho's next goal would come in the Champions League, against Celtic, in a 1–1 home draw on 6 December 2016. Iheanacho's final goal of the season, and subsequently final goal for City, came against Huddersfield in a 5–1 FA Cup fifth round replay win, in which Iheanacho scored the final goal of the game.

Iheanacho was signed by Premier League club Leicester City on a five-year contract on 3 August 2017, for a reported £25 million fee. He made his debut for the club in a 4–3 defeat to Arsenal on 11 August 2017. He scored his first goal for Leicester in an EFL Cup tie against Leeds United on 24 October 2017. On 16 January 2018, Iheanacho became the first player in English football to be awarded a goal due to VAR, as the referee deemed that the player had been incorrectly ruled offside for his second goal. The goal was Iheanacho's second in a 2–0 win over Fleetwood Town in the FA Cup Third Round replay.

Iheanacho has represented Nigeria at youth levels from under-13 upwards. His first experience of a major international tournament was the 2013 African U-17 Championship in Morocco. For Iheanacho, the highlight was a hat-trick in a win against Botswana. He dedicated his goals to his mother, who died two months before the tournament. Nigeria reached the final of the competition, where they were defeated on penalties by the Ivory Coast.

Iheanacho played a significant role in the 2013 FIFA U-17 World Cup, where he won the Golden Ball award for player of the tournament. Nigeria won the competition, in which Iheanacho scored six times, including once in the final, and provided seven assists. In the run-up to the 2014 African Nations Championship, Iheanacho trained with the senior Nigeria squad but was released from the squad in order to travel to England to sign with Manchester City. He was part of the Nigeria squad for the 2015 FIFA U-20 World Cup in New Zealand, and featured in two matches.

He was selected by Nigeria for their 35-man provisional squad for the 2016 Summer Olympics, but failed to make the final 18.

Iheanacho made his senior debut as a substitute in a 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifying match against Swaziland in which Nigeria drew 0–0. His first start for the senior team was on 25 March 2016, a 1–1 draw with Egypt in a 2017 Africa Cup of Nations qualifying match.

Iheanacho was selected by Nigeria in friendly games against Mali and Luxembourg in May 2016. He scored in the two games, providing an assist against Luxembourg.

His performance in the friendly matches inspired further confidence within football circles in the nation and was invited to make his competitive debut against Egypt in an African Cup of Nations qualifying series where he provided an assist for Oghenekaro Etebo in the home game.

Despite the change made in the coaching personnel in August this year, he distinguished himself again as one of the most important players in the team when he scored two super goals in the two matches against Tanzania in Uyo and Zambia in Ndola.

In May 2018 he was named in Nigeria’s preliminary 30 man squad for the 2018 World Cup in Russia.

Manchester City

Nigeria U17

Individual

Iheanacho is a devout Christian.



</doc>
<doc id="32335947" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32335947" title="Jamie Vardy">
Jamie Vardy

Jamie Richard Vardy ("né" Gill; born 11 January 1987) is an English professional footballer who plays as a striker for club Leicester City and the England national team.

After being released by Sheffield Wednesday at the age of sixteen, Vardy began his senior career with Stocksbridge Park Steels, breaking into the first team in 2007 and spending three seasons before joining Northern Premier League club F.C. Halifax Town in 2010. Scoring 25 goals in his debut season, he won the club's "Player's Player of the Year" award, then moved to Conference Premier club Fleetwood Town in August 2011 for an undisclosed fee. He scored 31 league goals in his first season at his new team, winning the team's "Player of the Year" award as they won the division.

In May 2012, Vardy signed for Leicester City in the Championship for a non-League record transfer fee of £1 million, and helped the team win the Championship in 2014. In the 2015–16 Premier League season, he scored in eleven consecutive Premier League matches, breaking Ruud van Nistelrooy's record, and was voted the Premier League Player of the Season and FWA Footballer of the Year as outsiders Leicester won the title. Vardy made his international debut in June 2015 and was selected for UEFA Euro 2016 and the 2018 FIFA World Cup.

Born in Sheffield, South Yorkshire, Vardy started his career with the Stocksbridge Park Steels youth system at 16 years old after being released by Sheffield Wednesday. He made his way through the reserve team and into the first team making his debut under manager Gary Marrow in 2007, earning £30 a week at the club. After impressive displays, a number of Football League teams became interested and in 2009 he spent a week on trial with Crewe Alexandra. A move did not materialise and he later turned down a short-term contract with Rotherham United.

In June 2010, manager Neil Aspin, a long time admirer of Vardy's talents, signed him for F.C. Halifax Town for a fee of £15,000. He made his debut on 21 August 2010 in the home match against Buxton, scoring the winning goal in a match that ended 2–1 to his new club. Vardy had a successful first season with "the Shaymen" finishing as the club's top goalscorer with 25 goals from 37 appearances and being voted the Player's Player of the Season. Towards the end of the season he came close to scoring a hat-trick of hat-tricks but failed to find a third goal in Halifax's 3–1 win over Nantwich Town. His goals helped secure the Northern Premier League Premier Division title for the 2010–11 season. Vardy started the 2011–12 season with Halifax and scored three goals in the opening four matches of the season.

After just over a year with Halifax, Vardy signed for Conference Premier club Fleetwood Town for an undisclosed fee. He made his debut the same day in a 0–0 home draw with York City. He scored his first goals for the club in his third appearance, scoring twice in a 3–2 win away to Kettering Town on 3 September. The following week he scored another two goals against Gateshead at Highbury Stadium, including one in added time. He scored twice for a third consecutive match when on in the 3–1 away win against Ebbsfleet United, but did not score again for just over a month until he scored a hat-trick in the away match against Alfreton Town on 18 October. On 20 September, he was given a straight red card in a 5–2 home win over Kidderminster Harriers, a match in which both teams played over an hour with ten men each. Four days after his hat-trick, Vardy scored two more goals in a 4–1 win over Bath City, a result which left Fleetwood two points behind leaders Wrexham.

In the first round of the FA Cup on 12 November, Vardy scored the second goal in a 2–0 win over League One club Wycombe Wanderers. Fifteen days later, his goal in a 1–1 draw at Gateshead meant that he had recorded a goal in each of his last six appearances, totalling ten goals in that period; he won the Conference Premier Player of the Month award for November. On 13 December, Vardy confirmed a 2–0 win in added time as Fleetwood triumphed 2–0 away to Yeovil Town in the Cup second round replay.

On 1 January 2012, Vardy scored twice in a 6–0 win over Southport, and six days later the team lost 5–1 at home to local rivals Blackpool in the third round of the Cup. After the match, Blackpool manager Ian Holloway made a £750,000 offer for him, which Fleetwood rejected, holding on for £1 million and a loan back to the club. He totalled six goals in his first four matches of the calendar year. On 21 February, he recorded a second hat-trick of the campaign, in a 6–2 win over Ebbsfleet United which left Fleetwood two points ahead of Wrexham at the top of the table. Vardy scored both Fleetwood goals in a 2–2 draw against Lincoln City on 13 April; Wrexham's draw against Grimsby Town the next day gave Fleetwood the Conference title and a first-ever promotion to the Football League. Vardy's 31 league goals saw him finish the season as the top scorer in the Conference Premier.

On 17 May 2012, it was announced that Vardy would be signing for Championship club Leicester City ahead of the 2012–13 season, for a reported fee of £1 million, a non-League record, which could potentially be worth up to £1.7 million with add-ons. The next day, he signed on a three-year contract until June 2015. On 14 August, Vardy made his debut for Leicester against Torquay United in the first round of the League Cup, playing the entirety of the match at Plainmoor and heading the final goal in a 4–0 win. Four days later he made his Football League debut at the King Power Stadium, a 2–0 win over Peterborough United in which he set up a goal for Andy King. He scored his first league goal in a 2–1 away defeat to Blackburn Rovers on 25 August. In September, he scored the winner in two 2–1 comeback victories, against Burnley and Middlesbrough. Vardy's first season at the club was marred by his own loss of form, prompting criticism from some City supporters on social media, and he even considered leaving football until manager Nigel Pearson and assistant manager Craig Shakespeare convinced him to continue with the club.

The following season brought a turn around in Vardy's fortunes as he established himself as a prolific scorer in the Leicester attack as the club took a commanding lead at the top of the table. Vardy scored and won a penalty as Leicester beat high flying local rivals Derby County 4–1 on 10 January 2014 and reaffirmed their position at the top of the Championship. Vardy finished the season with 16 league goals as Leicester were promoted to the Premier League at the end of the season as champions, and was named Leicester's Players' Player of the season at the club's awards.

On 19 August 2014, Vardy extended his contract until the summer of 2018. After missing the first two matches of the season through injury, he made his Premier League debut on 31 August 2014, as a second-half substitute in a 1–1 draw at home to Arsenal. On 21 September, Vardy delivered a man of the match performance by scoring his first Premier League goal and setting up the other four as Leicester made a surprise comeback from 3–1 down to a 5–3 victory against Manchester United.

On 11 April 2015, Vardy scored a 90th-minute winning goal in the Foxes' 3–2 victory at West Bromwich Albion. Impressive form throughout the rest of April, including another winning goal, against Burnley on 25 April, saw Vardy nominated for the Premier League Player of the Month award. Vardy and Leicester ended the 2014–15 season in a safe 14th position having picked up 22 points since 4 April, capping things off by opening the scoring in a 5–1 victory against Queens Park Rangers on the final day of the Premier League season on 24 May.

Vardy started the 2015–16 season by scoring the opening goal as Leicester picked up a 4–2 victory at home against Sunderland on 8 August 2015. He scored the equaliser in Leicester's 3–2 comeback victory against Aston Villa on 13 September. With two goals in Leicester's 5–2 defeat to Arsenal on 26 September, Vardy reached seven league goals for the season, eclipsing his goal tally of the previous year.

On 24 October, he scored the only goal of a home win over Crystal Palace, the seventh consecutive Premier League match in which he scored, and his tenth goal of the league season. Vardy scored in his eighth league match in a row on 31 October, and became only the third player ever to do so in the Premier League after Ruud van Nistelrooy (twice) and Daniel Sturridge, in a 3–2 win over West Bromwich Albion. A week later, he won and scored a penalty to secure a 2–1 win over Watford, putting him on nine consecutive matches with a goal, behind Van Nistelrooy's Premier League record of ten. Vardy also became the first player in the Premiership to score in nine consecutive matches in a single season, as Van Nistelrooy's 10 matches were at the end of the 2002–03 season and the beginning of the 2003–04 season. For his run of good form, Vardy was the Premier League Player of the Month for October 2015, the first Leicester player to be given the accolade since goalkeeper Tim Flowers in September 2000.

On 21 November, Vardy matched Van Nistelrooy's record of consecutive Premier League matches with a goal, opening a 3–0 win over Newcastle United. A week later, against Manchester United, he scored again to claim the record for himself. His run ended on 5 December when he did not score in a 3–0 win at Swansea City, having done so he would have equalled the English top-flight record of 12 consecutive scoring matches set by Jimmy Dunne for Sheffield United in 1931–32; the result nonetheless put Leicester on top of the table. Following his goalscoring exploits, Vardy was again named as the Premier League Player of the Month for November, becoming only the fifth ever player to win the award in consecutive months. He was presented with a certificate from Guinness World Records for his achievement.

By January 2016, Vardy's transfer value had risen from £2.1 million to £18.8 million, with manager Claudio Ranieri describing him as "priceless". On 2 February, he scored both goals in a 2–0 win against Liverpool, the first being a long-distance volley described as "world class" by opposing manager Jürgen Klopp. Four days later, he signed a new contract to keep himself at Leicester until 2019, increasing his weekly salary to £80,000. On 10 April 2016, Vardy scored both goals (his 20th and 21st of the season) in Leicester's 2–0 win at Sunderland, becoming the first Leicester player since Gary Lineker in the 1984–85 season to score 20 goals in the top division of English football. The result also secured qualification to the UEFA Champions League for the first time in Leicester's history. A week later, Vardy scored the first goal of a 2–2 home draw against West Ham United, but was later sent off for diving in the penalty area under pressure from Angelo Ogbonna. He was charged with improper conduct for his reaction to the dismissal and was fined £10,000, as well as being suspended for two matches during a vital point of Leicester's eventually successful title campaign.

With 24 league goals, Vardy was the second highest scorer in the Premier League for the 2015–16 season, alongside Sergio Agüero, only one goal behind Golden Boot winner Harry Kane. Vardy was one of four Leicester players in the PFA Team of the Year; he was later also named the FWA Footballer of the Year, and the 2016 Barclays Premier League Player of the Season.

On 3 June 2016, Arsenal made a bid of £22 million for Vardy, triggering a release clause in his contract. Leicester offered him improved terms, and 20 days later he agreed to a new four-year deal, to be signed on his return from UEFA Euro 2016. Vardy rejected Arsenal's offer due to not being assured that he would be played in his normal position, and because of the differences between the two club's tactics, with Arsène Wenger favouring possession and Leicester playing on the counter-attack.

On 7 August 2016, he scored in a 2–1 defeat to Manchester United in the 2016 FA Community Shield. Twenty days later, Vardy scored his first league goal of the season in Leicester's first win of the campaign, beating Swansea City 2–1.

On 10 December 2016, Vardy ended his ten-match drought within the opening five minutes against Manchester City. He ended up scoring another two for his first professional hat-trick to help Leicester to a 4–2 victory, their first win in five league matches. A week later, he was sent off in the first half of a 2–2 draw at Stoke City for a challenge on Mame Biram Diouf; Leicester appealed unsuccessfully against his three-match suspension.

On 22 February 2017, Vardy scored his first UEFA Champions League goal in a 2–1 away defeat to Sevilla in the first leg of the round of 16.

Vardy commenced his 6th season at the club on 11 August 2017 by netting two goals in the 4–3 away loss to Arsenal in the opening day of 2017–18 Premier League. This was followed by three more goals in September, including one in the 1–1 draw against Huddersfield Town which was one of two points collected by Leicester in four matches this month. On 16 October, Vardy made his 200th appearance for the club by starting in the 1–1 draw against West Bromwich Albion. Two weeks later, he scored the opener of a 2–0 home win against Everton to give "The Foxes" a second consecutive league win after six winless games and also to send them clear of relegation zone. It was also Claude Puel's debut match as Leicester manager.

Later on 19 December, Vardy scored a 97th-minute equaliser with a penalty kick in the EFL Cup quarter-final match against Manchester City to tie the game 1–1; the game subsequently went to penalty shootouts where Vardy along with Riyad Mahrez were the only players to miss their attempts as Leicester lost 3–4. Four days later, he netted his 50th Premier League in the 2–2 draw against Manchester United. Vardy continued his fine form by scoring his 10th Premier League goal of the season on 20 January of the following year via a penalty kick in the 2–0 home win versus Watford. The following month, Vardy scored the lone goal of the FA Cup fifth round match against Sheffield United to allow Leicester progression to quarter-finals, only to be eliminated by Chelsea after extra-time, with Vardy scoring his team's only goal.

By netting a brace in the final day of the season, a 5–4 away defeat by Tottenham Hotspur, Vardy reached 20-goal landmark in the Premier League for the second time in his career. Overall, he made 42 appearances in all competitions, scoring 23 times as Leicester finished the Premier League in 9th place. Vardy was the recipient of the BBC Goal of the Season award for a goal against West Bromwich Albion where he struck a first-time ball with his weaker foot that was looped over his shoulder at range by his strike partner Riyad Mahrez.

On 9 August 2018, just before the start of the 2018–19 season, Vardy signed a new four-year deal at Leicester, keeping him at the club until 2022, when he will be 35. Vardy started the season as a substitute, scoring a 92nd minute consolation goal in the 2–1 away defeat to Manchester United on the opening match of the season. He was sent off the following match after a harsh tackle on Wolves defender Matt Doherty. On 9 March Vardy scored two goals in a 3–1 home win over Fulham. The first goal being his 100th for The Foxes. This win was Brendan Rodgers first at his new club.

On 21 May 2015, Vardy was called up to the English national team for the first time ahead of a friendly against the Republic of Ireland and a UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying match against Slovenia. He made his debut on 7 June in the goalless draw against the Republic of Ireland at the Aviva Stadium in Dublin, replacing captain Wayne Rooney for the final 15 minutes. On 30 August, Vardy was again called up to the England squad for the matches against San Marino and Switzerland in UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying, being selected in the starting line-up as England ran out 6–0 winners against San Marino in Serravalle six days later. Vardy scored his first international goal on 26 March 2016, equalising with a back heel from Nathaniel Clyne's cross, as a substitute in a 3–2 away win against Germany. He scored again, three days later, the opening goal in a 2–1 defeat to the Netherlands at Wembley.

Vardy made his tournament debut on 16 June, in England's second group match at UEFA Euro 2016, coming off the bench in the second half to score an equalising goal against Wales, helping his team come from behind to win the match 2–1. During the tournament, there were media rumours of a feud between Vardy and fellow striker Rooney, which were denied by manager Roy Hodgson.

He was named in the 23-man England squad for the 2018 FIFA World Cup.

On 28 August 2018, Vardy "stepped aside" from the England national team, telling manager Gareth Southgate that he did not want to be considered for selection unless there was an injury crisis.

Ian Wright, who also rose from non-League football to the Premier League and English national team, wrote in October 2015 that Vardy could be England's equivalent to Salvatore Schillaci at UEFA Euro 2016: Schillaci, another late bloomer, began the 1990 FIFA World Cup as a substitute behind more established players, and ended it as the top scorer. Wright, who first learnt of Vardy when his former Burnley teammate Micky Mellon signed him for Fleetwood, rates Vardy as a hard-working player with a good first touch, who creates constant work for defenders, and plays by instinct instead of being moulded by his managers. Although he usually plays in a central role as a striker, he is a versatile player, who is capable of playing in several attacking positions, and has also been used as a winger.

In addition to his goalscoring, Vardy is known for his high work-rate, relentless running, and direct approach, and is also capable of creating chances for his teammates. He is an extremely fast and dynamic striker, with good positioning, and an excellent sense of space in the area; he is also known for his ability to play on the last defender's shoulder, time his runs to beat the defensive line, and stretch opponents, which, combined with his pace, makes him a threat on counter-attacks. A composed finisher and an accurate penalty taker, he is also good in the air, and capable of striking the ball powerfully with both feet. England coach and Sky Sports pundit Gary Neville commented on how Vardy's approach influences teammates: "He sets the tempo and the tone for the rest of the team and gives no other player behind him any excuse for not working hard."

According to Leicester vice-chairman Aiyawatt Srivaddhanaprabha, Vardy drank heavily every night during his early days at the club, and would turn up at training still intoxicated. Srivaddhanaprabha discussed with Vardy over what he expected in his life, and Vardy gave up drinking and took training more seriously from then on.

During UEFA Euro 2016, Vardy spoke to the media about his unusual lifestyle choices for a professional sportsperson. He said that he does not exercise in a gym, and that he consumes Red Bull caffeinated beverages and snus smokeless tobacco.

Before turning professional, Vardy combined playing non-League football with a job as technician making medical splints. In 2007, he received a conviction for assault following an incident outside a pub, and had to play with an electronic tag fitted for six months, while his curfew also limited his playing time at Stocksbridge Park Steels.

In August 2015, "The Sun on Sunday" published a video of Vardy at a casino the previous month, calling a man of East Asian origin a "Jap". He apologised for a "regrettable error of judgement" and was fined by Leicester, who put him on an educational course.

Vardy met Rebekah Nicholson in 2014 while she was working as a nightclub promoter. The couple married on 25 May 2016 at Peckforton Castle in Cheshire, with David Nugent as the best man. Vardy has three biological children, two with his wife, and one from a previous relationship. He is also stepfather to two children from his wife's previous relationships.

In November 2015, Vardy launched V9 Academy, an annual week-long camp designed to offer coaching and guidance to 60 non-League players and offer them the opportunity to showcase their talent in front of scouts from league clubs. The same month, Stocksbridge Park Steels named their main stand after him. In December 2015, the Leicester-based food manufacturer Walkers brought out a limited edition 'Vardy Salted' crisp flavour, in recognition of Vardy's goalscoring run. Adrian Butchart, British writer of the "Goal!" series of football-related fiction films, finished a script in 2016 for a film about Vardy. Vardy is an ambassador for Dorothy Goodman School, a special needs school in Hinckley, Leicestershire.

F.C. Halifax Town

Fleetwood Town

Leicester City

England

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="43552949" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43552949" title="James Maddison">
James Maddison

James Daniel Maddison (born 23 November 1996) is an English professional footballer who plays as an attacking midfielder for club Leicester City. He began his career with Coventry City before joining Norwich City in 2016. He has also played for Aberdeen on loan.

Maddison was born and raised in Coventry, West Midlands. He is of Irish descent through a grandparent.

Maddison joined Coventry City's youth team, and was included in the first-team squad in the 2013–14 season, though did not make an appearance. He made his debut in August 2014, coming on as a substitute in a 2–1 League Cup defeat to Cardiff City. Maddison made his league debut, again as a substitute, in a 3–1 home loss against Bristol City and his first league start in the following game, against Oldham Athletic. He scored his first league goal in the game, with a free-kick in the first-half, as the Sky Blues lost the game 4–1.

In November 2014, Maddison signed his first professional contract, lasting three and a half years, but missed much of the rest of the 2014–15 season after being sent-off during a Boxing Day defeat to Doncaster Rovers and then picking up a back injury.

Maddison signed for Premier League club Norwich City on 1 February 2016 on a three-and-a-half-year contract for an undisclosed fee, but was immediately loaned back to Coventry City for the remainder of the 2015–16 season.

On 31 August 2016, Maddison was loaned to Scottish Premiership club Aberdeen for the first part of the 2016–17 season. He made his debut as a substitute against Inverness Caledonian Thistle, then started and scored in the next match in a 3–1 win against Dundee. He followed this with a last-minute winner against Rangers on 25 September 2016.

After returning from his loan spell at Aberdeen, Maddison made his long-awaited league debut for Norwich on 17 April 2017, coming on as a substitute in the second half and scoring in a 3–1 win against Preston North End at Deepdale. Maddison signed a new four-year contract in June 2017. With the arrival of new coach Daniel Farke, Maddison was given regular starts in the team during the 2017–18 season and was named Norwich City's Player of the Season at the end of the campaign, as well as receiving a nomination for the EFL Championship Young Player of the Season award.

Maddison signed for Premier League club Leicester City on 20 June 2018 on a five-year contract for an undisclosed fee, thought to be around £20 million. He scored his first goal in the Premier League on 18 August in a 2–0 win against Wolverhampton Wanderers. He later followed up his impressive start for the club with back-to-back Premier League goals, from set-pieces, against AFC Bournemouth and Huddersfield Town respectively.

Maddison was included in an England under-21 squad in March 2016, but was unable to play due to injury. He received his first call-up to the England under-21 team in November 2017, and made his debut against Ukraine in a 2019 UEFA European Under-21 Championship qualifier. He received his first call up to the senior team in October 2018 for the UEFA Nations League matches against Croatia and Spain.

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="21719255" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21719255" title="Marc Albrighton">
Marc Albrighton

Marc Kevin Albrighton (born 18 November 1989) is an English professional footballer who plays as a winger for Premier League club Leicester City.

He joined Aston Villa at the age of eight, and made his professional debut for them in 2009. he totalled nine goals in 101 professional appearances for Villa, also spending a loan spell at Wigan Athletic in 2013. After being released in 2014, he signed for Leicester City where he won the Premier League in 2015–16, playing in every league match of the season.

Albrighton represented the England U21 and U20 sides.

Born in Tamworth, Staffordshire, Albrighton started his career at hometown club Mile Oak Monarchs, before he was offered a trial at Villa's local rivals West Bromwich Albion. He was rejected by Albion, then subsequently signed for Villa at the age of eight.

After impressing in the under-18 squad and playing in the reserves, Albrighton's first taste of senior action came on 10 July 2008, playing 17 minutes as a substitute in the 6–0 pre-season friendly victory over Wil. He made his competitive debut in the UEFA Cup match away at CSKA Moscow on 26 February 2009, a 2–0 loss (3–1 aggregate).

During the 2009–10 pre-season, Albrighton was included in the squad which played in the pre-season friendly tournament, the 2009 Peace Cup, in which he scored his first goal for the club in a 3–1 win over Atlante. He played in the Peace Cup final in which Villa beat Italians Juventus 4–3 in a penalty shootout.

Albrighton made his Premier League debut on 15 August 2009, the opening day of the 2009–10 season against Wigan Athletic at Villa Park, coming on as a 68th-minute substitute for Habib Beye in a 0–2 loss. On 24 September, he extended his contract with Villa by three years. In December, manager Martin O'Neill admitted that Albrighton along with fellow youngsters Nathan Delfouneso and Ciaran Clark were the subject of many loan offers, but went on to state his belief that the trio were good enough to learn their trade in the fringes of the Aston Villa side.

After a good pre-season, Albrighton made his first Premier League start in the first match of the 2010–11 season against West Ham United on 14 August 2010, assisting two goals in Villa's 3–0 win. He scored his first goal for Villa against Tottenham Hotspur on 2 October. He was sent off against Burnley in the League Cup on 27 October, therefore missing a chance to play in the following match against local rivals Birmingham City. On 5 November, Albrighton signed a new contract keeping him at the club until 2014. On 23 November, Albrighton was ruled out of action for three to four weeks after having his appendix removed, but made his return ahead of schedule in a 3–0 defeat to Liverpool at Anfield on 6 December, playing 65 minutes before being replaced by Robert Pires.
Albrighton then set up both goals for the home side in the 2–1 defeat of local rivals West Bromwich Albion in December 2010.

On 21 December 2011, he scored the Premier League's 20,000th goal at home against Arsenal, winning a £20,000 cheque from league sponsors Barclays, donated to his chosen charity, Acorns Children's Hospice. He then scored the opening goal in a 3–1 win against Bristol Rovers at the Memorial Ground in the FA Cup.

A throat operation restricted Albrighton to a single outing, in the League Cup, up to October 2013. He joined Wigan Athletic on a 28-day loan on 30 October 2013. He made four appearances for Wigan before returning to his parent club on 27 November 2013. Albrighton was released by Villa on 20 May 2014.

On 23 May 2014, Albrighton joined Leicester City on a four-year contract, following their return to the Premier League for the first time in a decade. He made his debut for the Foxes on 23 August, replacing Riyad Mahrez for the final 22 minutes of a 2–0 loss at Chelsea. The following 29 April, in the reverse fixture at the King Power Stadium, he scored his first Leicester goal, putting Leicester ahead just before half time in an eventual 3–1 loss. Albrighton totalled 18 league appearances in his first season at his new club, adding a second goal in the last match of the season, a 5–1 win against Queens Park Rangers on 24 May. Albrighton struggled to break into the first team squad at the start of the season, but nearer the end of the year was used as a wing-back by manager Nigel Pearson in a new formation that brought Leicester success. He played an instrumental role in helping complete Leicester's 'great escape' as the team won 7 out of their last 9 matches to finish 14th.

Albrighton played more regularly under new manager Claudio Ranieri, featuring in every league match in the campaign. Albrighton scored his first goal of the season in the opening 4–2 victory over Sunderland, which set the tone for a remarkable season. He partnered N'Golo Kanté, Riyad Mahrez and Danny Drinkwater in a regular 4-man midfield as the club won their first ever top-flight title. Albrighton played on the left of midfield for the majority of the campaign, and was noted for his "diligent work defensively and when going forward, as well as his high-class crossing from open play and set pieces." with manager Ranieri claiming "Albrighton embodies the spirit of Leicester" for his "unmistakable sense of sacrifice." Whilst playing every match, Albrighton scored two goals, with his second coming in Leicester's crucial 4–0 win over Swansea on 24 April. He was rewarded with a new four-year contract in August 2016.

On 14 September 2016, Albrighton scored the club's first ever Champions League goal in a 3–0 win over Club Brugge at the Jan Breydel Stadium. He was the first Leicester player to score in a European competition since Muzzy Izzet against Red Star Belgrade in September 2000. Albrighton described the goal as "probably one of the greatest achievements of my career so far".

On 25 February 2017, reports emerged alleging that Albrighton was among several teammates who met with chairman Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha following their 2–1 Champions League defeat at Sevilla on 22 February, which led to manager Claudio Ranieri being sacked. Albrighton dismissed the claims as "totally incorrect".

In Leicester City's Champions League Last 16 tie against Sevilla on 14 March 2017, Albrighton scored the second goal for the hosts which capped off a remarkable win, sealing a 3–2 aggregate win and progression to the Quarter finals.

On 2 April 2009, Albrighton made his debut for the England under 20s. He made his debut for U21 team in September 2010 during their Euro 2011 qualifying play-offs and scored just fifteen minutes after coming on as a substitute.

Albrighton confirmed to the "Birmingham Mail" that his dreams came true in playing for Aston Villa, the team he has supported since a young age. He named former Villa players David Ginola, Benito Carbone and Robert Pires as some of his footballing role models, along with England legend David Beckham to whom he has been compared due to crossing ability and technique.

Albrighton became a father for the first time on 19 February 2012 when his partner Chloe Fulford gave birth to a baby daughter, Matilda Beau, in Sutton Coldfield. Fulford's mother, Sue Davey, was killed in the Tunisian terror attacks in June 2015.

Leicester City



</doc>
<doc id="10846499" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10846499" title="Danny Ward">
Danny Ward

Danny Ward (born ), also known by the nickname of "Wardy", is the head coach of the London Broncos in the Super League, and an English former professional rugby league footballer who played in the 1990s, 2000s and 2010s. At international level, he played for Great Britain, and at club level for the Leeds Rhinos, Castleford Tigers, Hull Kingston Rovers and in the Super League.

Ward was previously Andrew Henderson's assistant coach at the London Broncos, and had held this position since 2015. Prior to this, he was head coach of the Under-19s.

Ward was born in Dewsbury, West Yorkshire, England.

Ward is the son of former Leeds captain and coach David Ward. He was signed for Leeds from Dewsbury Moor, and he made his début as a substitute against Sheffield Eagles in 1999. He was named the Leeds Alliance Player of the Year in 2000, before becoming a regular first team member the following season.

Ward first played at international level for the Great Britain Academy before being selected for John Kear's England Under-21 squad for the tour of South Africa at the end of the 2001 season. England won the First Test 112–6 in the first test and the second 74–14. In 2002 he was selected in the England 'A' squad to play New Zealand at Griffin Park, losing 12–34. He then was part of the squad to tour Fiji and Tonga. One of his highlights in 2002 was a drop goal in a victory at the Boulevard on his 21st birthday.

Ward emulated his father by playing in the Challenge Cup Final in 2003. In 2004 he made 14 first team starts and 12 substitute appearances, and scored a try in the 46–28 win over Wakefield. Ward played for the Leeds Rhinos at in their 2004 Super League Grand Final victory against the Bradford Bulls. In 2004 Ward made the transition into the senior Great Britain team making his début as a substitute against New Zealand in the Tri Nations competition.

As Super League IX champions, the Rhinos faced 2004 NRL season premiers, the Bulldogs in the 2005 World Club Challenge. Ward played as a in Leeds' 39–32 victory. In his final season with Leeds, Ward scored a try in the 2005 Challenge Cup Final against Hull and in the Grand Final qualifying win at St. Helens that took the Rhinos back to Old Trafford for the Grand Final. He played for the Rhinos at in their 2005 Super League Grand Final loss against Bradford Bulls. He left Leeds before the 2006 Super League season to join Castleford.

At the beginning of the 2006's Super League XI, Ward was released after an unsavoury incident. He joined the Castleford Tigers, who had just been promoted from National League One. Ward adapted well to his new surroundings and one of his highlights that year was a try in the 31–30 victory over his former employers at the Jungle. However, his efforts were not enough to save Castleford from relegation.

For the 2007 season, he like Luke Dyer, a teammate of his at Castleford, moved east to pastures new at Craven Park with Hull Kingston Rovers. So far, Ward has yet to make the impact that he did at both Leeds and Castleford, but his presence presents a danger to any defence in the whole of Super League.

He was released from Hull KR on 17 September 2007. He signed a two-year deal with Harlequins starting from the 2008 season.

Ward was the head coach of the London Broncos Under-19s for the 2014 and 2015 seasons. He was currently the assistant coach in 2015 and 2017.

He was promoted to head coach from the beginning of the 2018 season. Ward took charge of his first professional game with a 56-12 victory over the Barrow Raiders.




</doc>
<doc id="42920340" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42920340" title="Ricardo Pereira">
Ricardo Pereira

Ricardo Pereira may refer to:



</doc>
<doc id="31481486" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31481486" title="Harry Maguire">
Harry Maguire

Jacob Harry Maguire (born 5 March 1993) is an English professional footballer who plays as a centre back for club Leicester City and the English national team.

Born in Sheffield, he came through the youth system at Sheffield United before graduating to the first team in 2011. He totalled 166 professional games for the Blades and was their Player of the Year three consecutive times, also featuring in the PFA Team of the Year for League One as many times. In 2014, he transferred to Hull City for £2.5 million, who loaned him to Wigan Athletic in 2015. He joined Leicester City in 2017 for a potential £17 million fee.

Maguire played one match for England under-21 in 2012. In October 2017, he made his senior debut, and he was chosen for the 2018 FIFA World Cup squad.

Maguire was born in Sheffield, South Yorkshire. After coming through the youth system at Sheffield United, and with the team struggling against relegation, he was promoted to the first-team squad, making his debut after coming on as a half-time substitute and winning the man of the match award in a home match against Cardiff City in April 2011. He made four further appearances that season but could not prevent the club from slipping into League One.

Having cemented his place in the first team Maguire scored his first goal for the Blades in a 2–0 win at Oldham Athletic on the opening day of the 2011–12 League One season. Having been ever present from the start of the season Maguire was handed an extended deal in October to keep him at Bramall Lane until 2015. He continued in great form as the Blades pushed for promotion from League One and was rewarded at the end of the season when he was named as both "Player of the Year" and "Young Player of the Year" by the club. The BBC's Match of the Day magazine selected Maguire in its League One Team of The Year for 2011–12.

Maguire went into the following season as first choice in the centre of defence and his good form continued as he scored a brace in a Football League Trophy tie in a 4–1 victory over Notts County at Meadow Lane on 17 October 2012. By the end of February 2013 Maguire had made his 100th start for the Blades in a 0–0 draw against Leyton Orient at Bramall Lane at the age of just 19.

On 21 June 2014 it was revealed that United had offered Maguire an improved contract amid interest from Hull City and Wolverhampton Wanderers in signing Maguire with United already rejecting a £1 million and an improved £1.5 million bid from Wolves.

On 29 July 2014, Maguire joined Hull City in a deal worth £2.5 million, signing a three-year contract. He made his debut for the Tigers on 21 August in the UEFA Europa League play-off round first leg away to Lokeren of Belgium, a 1–0 defeat. He did not make his Premier League debut until 20 December, when he replaced the injured Curtis Davies for the final 13 minutes of a home loss by the same score against Swansea City.

After making only six appearances across all competitions at Hull, Maguire joined Wigan Athletic of the Championship on a one-month loan deal on 10 February 2015. A week later, he debuted in a 1–0 win at Reading. On 28 February, he scored a header from Jermaine Pennant's cross in a 3–1 win away to Blackpool. Having played as many games in his month-long loan as he had for Hull in the first half of the season, Maguire's stay at the DW Stadium was extended until the end of the season.

While Maguire was out on loan, Hull had been relegated to the Championship. On 28 May 2016, they won promotion back with a 1–0 play-off final win over Sheffield Wednesday at Wembley Stadium, with him replacing goalscorer Mohamed Diamé in the final minute.

In 2016–17, manager Mike Phelan made Maguire into a first-team regular. Maguire scored his first goal for Hull in a 2–1 EFL Cup win against Bristol City on 25 October 2016. Maguire captained Hull City in their league victory against Middlesbrough on 5 April 2017 and scored his first Premier League goal in the 4–2 win. In a season that ended with relegation, he was voted Hull's Player of the Year by both the fans and the players.

On 15 June 2017, Maguire signed for Premier League club Leicester City on a five-year contract for an initial £12 million fee, potentially rising to £17 million with add-ons. He made his debut on 11 August as the season began with a 4–3 loss at Arsenal, and eight days later he scored his first goal for the Foxes, heading in Riyad Mahrez's corner to conclude a 2–0 win over Brighton & Hove Albion at the King Power Stadium. He played in every minute of the 2017–18 season and was awarded player of the season, as well as players' player of the season at the club's end of season awards. 

Amid speculation about a transfer to Manchester United for a potential world record fee for a defender, Maguire's Leicester manager Claude Puel confirmed on transfer deadline day of 9 August 2018 that Maguire would stay at the club, his only travel to Manchester being to face United with the Leicester squad in the fixture the evening after.

Maguire was called up to the England national under-21 team for the first time in November 2012 for a friendly against Northern Ireland. Danny Wilson stated "He has got a fantastic maturity for his age, he takes everything in his stride and nothing fazes him. I don't expect this call-up to either because he is such a level headed character." Maguire duly made his England under-21 debut as a substitute in the 60th minute, coming on for Liverpool's Andre Wisdom in a 2–0 win against Northern Ireland Under-21s at Bloomfield Road.

On 24 August 2017, England manager Gareth Southgate included Maguire in his squad for the 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification matches against Malta and Slovakia. He made his debut when starting in England's 1–0 away win over Lithuania, which was the team's final match in their successful 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification campaign.

Maguire was named in the 23-man England national team squad for the 2018 FIFA World Cup. He assisted Harry Kane's winner against Tunisia on 18 June 2018 in England's World Cup opener. England won 2–1. Maguire scored his first England goal on 7 July 2018 with a 30th-minute header from Ashley Young's cross in a 2–0 win over Sweden in the quarter-final.

Maguire's brothers, Joe and Laurence, are also footballers. He attended St Mary's Roman Catholic High School, Chesterfield and returned to present a signed shirt to the school. He is engaged to Fern Hawkins.

Hull City

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="3168260" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3168260" title="Eldin Jakupović">
Eldin Jakupović

Eldin Jakupović (; born 2 October 1984) is a Bosnian-born Swiss professional footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for Premier League club Leicester City.

He started his professional career at Grasshopper in 2004, then moved to FC Thun a year later. After success there, Jakupović joined FC Lokomotiv Moscow in March 2006. In September 2011, he joined Aris, and in 2012, he moved to Hull. In 2017, he left Hull City after their relegation back to the EFL Championship to join Premier League side, Leicester City.

Having played at under-21 level for both Bosnia and Switzerland, he earned his only senior cap for the latter in 2008, and was part of their squad at UEFA Euro 2008.

Jakupović was born in Prijedor, SFR Yugoslavia, present-day Bosnia and Herzegovina. He moved to Switzerland at a young age due to the Bosnian War and started his professional career at Grasshopper in 2004. He then moved to FC Thun in 2005. After a successful spell at FC Thun, Jakupović joined FC Lokomotiv Moscow in March 2006.

Jakupović moved on a year-long loan to Grasshopper on 30 August 2007. He scored a 94th-minute equaliser against BSC Young Boys in his third match for the club, earning Grasshopper a 3–3 draw. During the season Jakupović forced Fabio Coltorti to the bench as his backup. At the end of the 2007–08 season, Jakupović extended his loan at Grasshopper for another year, which meant new signing goalkeeper Massimo Colomba was benched.

On 31 August 2009, Jakupović was confirmed as part of the Lokomotiv Moscow squad, with Ivan Pelizzoli leaving on loan to join AlbinoLeffe. Due to the number of foreigners in the Lokomotiv squad, Jakupović was asked to go out on loan again. In December, Jakupović went on trial at Tottenham Hotspur and had a successful week. However, due to various reasons a deal could not be completed with Lokomotiv Moscow. After a turbulent time with the Lokomotiv management, Jakupović was allowed to be released.

Jakupović had a fine season with Olympiakos Volou. After they were relegated to the Delta Ethniki, Jakupović left the team.

On 30 September 2011, Jakupović joined Aris, with three other ex-teammates, Noe Acosta, Javier Umbides and Khalifa Sankare. He made his debut on 5 November 2011, against Olympiakos SFP, which finished 2–3.

On 20 March 2012, Jakupović joined English Championship club Hull City on trial, and after impressing in training and a friendly match Hull manager Nick Barmby expressed a desire to sign Jakupović on a permanent contract. Following the sacking of Nick Barmby, Jakupović had trials with Ipswich Town. On 9 July 2012, Jakupović signed for Hull City on a two-year contract, becoming Steve Bruce's first full signing as manager. He officially joined the team on their pre-season training session in Portugal. He made his debut in a 3–1 friendly win against North Ferriby United on 16 July 2012. His first Championship match for The Tigers came on 21 December 2012 at Derby County, when he played in a 2–1 victory as Hull moved into second place in the Championship table. This was followed up by three more league appearances, all of which consisted of clean sheets.

In January 2014 Jakupović joined Leyton Orient on loan until 8 February. On 29 January 2014, Jakupović was recalled to parent club Hull City. On 13 February 2014, Jakupović re-joined Leyton Orient until 17 May 2014, but was again recalled on 27 March 2014.

On 9 July 2014 Jakupović signed a new two-year contract with Hull City, and began their Premier League campaign as third-choice goalkeeper behind Allan McGregor and Steven Harper. He made his first appearance of the season on 18 October away to Arsenal as a substitute when Harper injured his arm before half-time, and did not concede until Danny Welbeck equalised for 2–2 in added time. A week later he started for the first time in the division, keeping a clean sheet in a goalless draw against Liverpool.

Jakupović started for Hull against Arsenal in the FA Cup fifth round on 20 February 2016, at the Emirates Stadium. He made 12 saves to earn his side a 0–0 draw, which led to a replay at the KC Stadium.

On 24 June 2016 Jakupović signed a new 2-year deal with Hull City. Since McGregor was out with a back injury that ruled him out for about six month, Jakupović started off the 2016–17 season against Premier League Champions, Leicester City and helped earn the Tigers a 2–1 victory on opening day.

On 19 July 2017, following Hull City's relegation back to the second tier of English football, Jakupović signed a three-year deal with Premier League side Leicester City.
He made his debut on FA Cup third round match against Fleetwood Town.

Jakupović has dual citizenship, both Bosnian and Swiss, and has represented both at under-21 level.

He has played for Bosnia and Herzegovina U21 for two competitive matches, and a friendly match against Austria U21 for Switzerland on 1 March 2006.

In August 2005, Jakupović received his first call-up to the Bosnia and Herzegovina national squad which was a match against Belgium and Lithuania, however he did not accept the call up. In March 2007, Jakupović was asked again to play for the senior Bosnia and Herzegovina against Norway, but declined the offer. Jakupović was included in the Swiss UEFA Euro 2008 squad. He made his debut on 20 August 2008 in a friendly match against Cyprus. He was called up for the first two matches of 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification, but was an unused substitute.

In October 2008, Jakupović said that he would not play again for the Swiss national team due to family reasons.

Hull City



</doc>
<doc id="38795633" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38795633" title="Daniel Amartey">
Daniel Amartey

Daniel Amartey (born 21 December 1994) is a Ghanaian professional footballer who plays as a defender or midfielder for Leicester City and the Ghana national team.

Amartey started out playing for second tier club International Allies in Ghana where he was spotted as a sixteen-year-old by Magnus Pehrsson who was on a scouting trip in Africa during his preparation to take over as manager of Djurgårdens IF. When Pearson became manager he secured the transfer rights for Amartey from the day he turned 18. To help prepare Amartey for his future permanent move to Sweden in 2013 the club brought him over for shorter periods of time in both 2011 and 2012 where he got to play for the club's U21 team.

Amartey made his Svenska Cupen debut on 3 March 2013 against Umeå FC. He then made his league debut in the 2013 Allsvenskan opening game away against Helsingborgs IF on 31 March. Amartey was praised by the media for his strong start to the 2013 season, and foreign clubs like FC Schalke 04 and 1. FC Kaiserslautern started to scout him. On 26 May he scored his first ever goal for the club when he headed home the 1–1 equalizer in the 2013 Svenska Cupen Final which Djurgården eventually lost against IFK Göteborg on penalties. After his first season in the Swedish league as an eighteen-year-old Amartey was ranked as the 10th best player in the league by newspaper Expressen and 18th best by Aftonbladet. In November 2013 Amartey confirmed that he was in talks with Liverpool F.C. over a possible move to the English club.

In July 2014, Amartey moved to F.C. Copenhagen for a fee of €2.5 million plus add ons, and made his Superliga-debut on 20 July in a match against Silkeborg IF.

On 22 January 2016, Amartey joined Premier League side Leicester City on a four-and-a-half-year contract for a fee around the region of up to £6 million. In his first season in his new country, Amartey featured five times as his team Leicester City won the Premier League title. He made his debut for the club on 27 February 2016, in 1–0 win over Norwich City at the King Power Stadium.

In the 2016–17 season, Amartey became a first team regular following the departure of N'Golo Kanté. partnering teammate Danny Drinkwater in the central midfield role. While his workrate roughly equalled Kanté's, he has been unable to match his tackles and interceptions. Amartey scored his first goal for Leicester in an 88th-minute equaliser away at Stoke City on 17 December 2016, salvaging a 2–2 draw. On 8 February 2017, just over 12 hours after returning to Leicester from international duty, Amartey played 120 minutes (including AET) in a 3–1 FA Cup fourth-round replay win over Derby County.

In May 2012 Amartey made his debut for the Ghana national under-20 football team in a game against Nigeria. He was also selected to play in the 2013 FIFA U-20 World Cup but Djurgården wanted to keep him in Sweden since the tournament clashed with the 2013 Allsvenskan season. In January 2015, Amartey played in all the group matches for Ghana at the 2015 Africa Cup of Nations, where the Black Stars finished as runners-up.

He played six times at the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations, lasting 90 minutes in every match to help Ghana finish fourth in the tournament. His performances saw him named in the CAF Team of the tournament.

Copenhagen

Leicester City

Ghana



</doc>
<doc id="52509311" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52509311" title="Harvey Barnes">
Harvey Barnes

Harvey Lewis Barnes (born 9 December 1997) is an English professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Leicester City.

Barnes is from Countesthorpe and is the son of former professional footballer Paul Barnes. In 2009, Barnes played for Greenfield Primary School in the Leicestershire & Rutland Schools Football Association competition known as The Rice Bowl.

Barnes is a product of the Leicester City academy, which he joined at the age of nine. He signed his first professional contract with the club on 25 June 2016 and on 7 December 2016 made his debut for the first team as a second-half substitute in a 5–0 UEFA Champions League defeat to FC Porto. During the first half of the 2016–17 Premier League 2 season for Leicester City U23, Barnes scored five goals and provided assists for five others.

On 21 July 2017, Barnes signed a new 4-year contract, keeping him at the King Power Stadium until July 2021. He made his Premier League debut on 19 April 2018, as a 91st minute substitute in a 0–0 draw against Southampton.

On 20 January 2017, Barnes joined League One club Milton Keynes Dons on loan for the remainder of the 2016–17 season. A day later, Barnes scored on his home debut as a 76th-minute substitute for Chuks Aneke in a 5–3 win over Northampton Town. Barnes followed his debut goal with another goal a week later, on 28 January, scoring in a 0–4 away win over rivals Peterborough United.

On 2 May 2017, after impressing with 6 goals in 21 appearances for the club, he was awarded Milton Keynes Dons' Young Player of the Year 2016–17 award.

On 11 August 2017, Barnes joined Championship club Barnsley on a season long loan. The following day, he made his debut for the club as an 80th-minute substitute in a 1–2 home defeat to Ipswich Town. He scored his first goal for Barnsley against Sunderland on 26 August 2017.

On 1 January 2018, Barnes was recalled from his loan spell at Barnsley and returned to Leicester City.

On 24 July 2018, Barnes signed a new four-year contract with Leicester and joined newly relegated Championship club West Bromwich Albion on a season long loan. He scored a spectacular goal on his league debut during a 2–1 home defeat against Bolton Wanderers on 4 August 2018.
On 11 January 2019, Barnes was recalled by Leicester with immediate effect.

Barnes was called up as one of six over-age players for the England U18 squad entered into the 2017 Toulon Tournament. He made his debut on 29 May 2017, featuring as a substitute in a 1–0 win over group rivals Angola U20. On 1 June 2017, Barnes scored twice in a 7–1 win over Cuba U20. On 8 June 2017, Barnes scored another brace in the competition's semi-final, in a 3–0 win over Scotland U20, and on 10 June 2017 went on to score his penalty in a deciding shootout during the final against Ivory Coast U20, with England being victorious. Overall, Barnes finished the tournament as joint recipient of the Golden Boot (top scorer) award with 4 goals along with teammate George Hirst and Angola U20's Chico Banza.

On 28 September 2017, Barnes was called up to the England U20 national team, and on 5 October 2017 featured as a substitute in a 1–5 away friendly win over Italy U20.

England U18

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="15108245" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15108245" title="Shinji Okazaki">
Shinji Okazaki

Internationally, he is currently the top active Japan national team goalscorer and third all-time in team history with 50 goals. He won the Premier League with Leicester in 2016.

After graduating Takigawa Daini High School in 2004, Okazaki signed full professional terms with Shimizu S-Pulse the following year. In December 2005, he made his first J.League appearance as a substitute against Sanfrecce Hiroshima. On 15 April 2007, he scored his first professional goal against Kawasaki Frontale. Okazaki ended his first season as a first team player with three goals from 13 matches.

Okazaki scored ten times in 27 matches during the 2008 J. League season and also represented S-Pulse in the J. League Cup Final, where the team lost 2–0 to Oita Trinita. He continued his promising goalscoring in the 2009 and 2010 seasons and, in January 2011, was signed by German side VfB Stuttgart of the Bundesliga.

On 30 January 2011, Okazaki signed a three-and-a-half-year contract with Stuttgart. On 17 February 2011, clearance to play for the club was granted for Okazaki by FIFA. He made his competitive debut for VfB on the same night in a Europa League match against Benfica. On 20 February 2011, Okazaki made his Bundesliga debut for VfB against Bayer 04 Leverkusen. Okazaki scored his first goal against Hannover 96, which he scored from outside the box.

Okazaki came on as a second-half substitute for Stuttgart in their first game of the 2011–12 Bundesliga season against FC Schalke 04. His side were up 2–0 and Okazaki added a goal scoring from long range in the 90th minute, sealing a 3–0 win. Okazaki's goal from a bicycle kick on 19 February 2012 in a Bundesliga match of VfB Stuttgart against Hannover 96 was selected Goal of the Month. After Yasuhiko Okudera in April 1978, Okazaki was the second player from Japan to win this award in Germany.

Okazaki had a poor 2012–13 season, scoring only once in the Bundesliga. However, he scored his first goals in European competition with two goals against FC Steaua București in the Europa League.

On 1 July 2013, Okazaki moved to 1. FSV Mainz 05. He scored his first goal for Mainz on his debut in a 3–2 win against his former club Stuttgart on the opening matchday of the 2013–14 Bundesliga season. At the end of the season he ended with 15 league goals.

Okazaki became the most prolific Japanese player in Bundesliga history on 13 September 2014, scoring his 27th and 28th league goals in Mainz's 3–1 win over Hertha Berlin.

On 26 June 2015, Okazaki moved to Premier League side Leicester City for a fee believed to be in the region of £7 million, subject to obtaining a work permit. He made his debut for the club on 8 August 2015 in Leicester City's 4–2 opening day win against Sunderland, and scored his first goal for the club the following week in a 2–1 win against West Ham United. On 19 December 2015, Okazaki scored the winner in a 3–2 win over Everton at Goodison Park, to ensure that Leicester City topped the table at Christmas. On 10 January 2016, Okazaki scored Leicester's second goal in the FA Cup clash at White Hart Lane with Tottenham Hotspur despite drawing to a late Harry Kane penalty in the 90th minute. On 14 March 2016, Okazaki scored the winning goal in a league fixture against Newcastle United, a spectacular overhead strike that won Leicester City the game 1–0 and took them five points clear at the top of the Premier League table. Okazaki went on to win the league that year thus becoming the second Japanese player to win the Premier League after Shinji Kagawa.

His performances in the 2015–16 season earned him the Asian International Player of the Year award in December 2016.

Okazaki scored twice in a 2–4 defeat to Chelsea in the third round of the 2016–17 EFL Cup on 20 September 2016. He scored his first league goal of the season in a 3–1 win over Crystal Palace on 22 October 2016, earning him Man of the match and achieving an 84.8% pass success rate, more than any other Leicester player. On 22 November 2016, Okazaki scored in a 2–1 win over Club Brugge in the Champions League group stage, becoming the sixth Japanese player to score a Champions League goal and the first since Keisuke Honda in November 2013. He finished the season with only three league goals.

Okazaki was in goalscoring form at the start to the 2017–18 season, scoring four goals in six appearances for Leicester in all competitions.

After competing for the country's under-23 team at the 2008 Olympic Games in China, Okazaki made his full international debut for Japan against the United Arab Emirates in October 2008. On 20 January 2009, he scored his first goal for "Samurai Blue" in the team's opening 2011 AFC Asian Cup qualifier against Yemen.

In October 2009, Okazaki scored hat-tricks in consecutive matches as Japan beat Hong Kong and Togo 6–0 and 5–0 respectively. He was named The World's Top Goal Scorer of 2009 by the IFFHS for his 15 goals with the national team.
Okazaki was included in Japan's squad for the 2010 FIFA World Cup and appeared as a substitute in all four of the team's matches. He scored once in the final Group E match, a 3–1 defeat of Denmark, to send the Japanese into the second round.

On 8 October 2010, Okazaki scored as Japan beat Argentina 1–0 in friendly match to record its first ever win over the 1978 and 1986 world champions.

Okazaki scored his third international hat-trick in a 5–0 Group B win against Saudi Arabia at the 2011 AFC Asian Cup. He then scored his kick in the semi-final shootout win over South Korea and played all 120 minutes of the final as Japan beat Australia to win the trophy for a fourth time.

Okazaki finished as top goalscorer in the Asian section of qualification for the 2014 FIFA World Cup with eight goals.

Okazaki scored twice at the 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup, against Italy and Mexico respectively. However, Japan lost all three of its matches and was eliminated at the end of the group stage.

In June 2014, Okazaki was selected in Japan's squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup. In the team's third group match, a 4–1 defeat to Colombia, he scored Samurai Blue's only goal with a header in the 45th minute.

Okazaki was included in Japan's squad for the 2015 AFC Asian Cup and scored in a 4–0 defeat of Palestine during the group stage.

In March 2016 Okazaki was presented with a commemorative shirt with 100 on the back in a presentation to celebrate his 100th international appearance for Japan.

Okazaki is currently the top active Japan national team goalscorer and third all-time in team history with 50 international goals.

Leicester City

Japan

Individual




</doc>
<doc id="40093849" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40093849" title="Youri Tielemans">
Youri Tielemans

Youri Marion A. Tielemans (born 7 May 1997) is a Belgian professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Leicester City of the Premier League, on loan from Ligue 1 club Monaco, and the Belgium national team.

Considered one of the brightest young prospects in world football, he began his career at Anderlecht, where he made 185 official appearances and scored 35 goals across four seasons. He won the league title twice and in 2017 was chosen as the Belgian Professional Footballer of the Year. He is the youngest Belgian to play in the UEFA Champions League, making his debut in the competition at the age of 16 years and 148 days.

Tielemans represented Belgium at several youth levels and gained his first cap for the full side in November 2016, aged 19. He was part of their squad that came third at the 2018 FIFA World Cup.

Born in Sint-Pieters-Leeuw, located just outside the Brussels-Capital Region, Tielemans is a youth product of Anderlecht and signed his first professional contract with the club at the age of 16.

On 21 July 2013, he was included in the senior squad for the first time, remaining an unused substitute in the 1–0 win over Genk in the 2013 Belgian Super Cup. A week later, he made his first-team debut in the opening round of the Belgian Pro League season against Lokeren, replacing injured Sacha Kljestan after 25 minutes of a 2–3 home loss. This made him the fourth-youngest player in the league's history.

On 2 October 2013, he became the youngest Belgian player to play in the UEFA Champions League, starting in a match against Olympiacos at the age of 16 years and 148 days. He played 29 games – of which 21 starts – as Anderlecht won the 2013–14 Belgian Pro League, scoring to open a 3–0 win over Club Brugge at the Constant Vanden Stock Stadium on 6 April 2014, a game in which he also assisted Cyriac. Tielemans won the Belgian Young Player of the Year award in each of his first two seasons.

Tielemans scored 13 times in 37 Belgian First Division A matches as Anderlecht won the 2016–17 Belgian First Division A. He won the 2017 Ebony Shoe Award for best player of African origin, and was named 2016–17 Belgian Professional Footballer of the Year. He scored 5 goals in 15 2016–17 UEFA Europa League matches, with his club reaching the quarter-finals, and was selected in its Squad of the Season.

On 24 May 2017, Tielemans joined 2016–17 Ligue 1 champions Monaco on a five-year deal for a fee of around €25 million. He made his competitive debut on 29 July in the Trophée des Champions at the Grand Stade de Tanger, playing the full 90 minutes in the 2–1 loss to Paris Saint-Germain and assisting Djibril Sidibé's opening goal. On 4 August, Tielemans made his Ligue 1 debut in the 3–2 home win over FC Toulouse, coming on as a substitute for Radamel Falcao in the 87th minute. He made his UEFA club competition debut for Monaco on 13 September in the UEFA Champions League group match away to RB Leipzig, playing the full 90 minutes and registering his first competitive goal for Monaco by equalizing in a 1–1 draw. On 16 September, Tielemans made his first Ligue 1 start and played the entire match in the 3–0 home win over RC Strasbourg Alsace, after having played a total of 56 minutes as a substitute in his first four Ligue 1 matches.

"France Football" named Tielemans in their lists of the biggest flops of the first half of the season and the season overall.

On 31 January 2019, Tielemans joined Premier League club Leicester City on loan until the end of the season, with Adrien Silva going the other way in a swap deal. On 9 March, Tielemans scored his first goal for the club in a 3–1 win over Fulham.

In June 2015, Tielemans was called up to the senior Belgium squad for a UEFA Euro 2016 qualifier against Wales. He finally made his senior international debut on 9 November 2016, in a 1–1 friendly away draw to rival Netherlands, replacing Steven Defour in the 82nd minute.

Tielemans was included in manager Roberto Martínez's 23-man squad for the 2018 FIFA World Cup in Russia. He played four matches in the tournament, including the 2–0 win over England in the third-place match. 

Tielemans earned his first senior goal for Belgium on 21 March 2019, in a qualifying match for UEFA Euro 2020 against Russia.

Tielemans' father is of Flemish descent and his mother is of Congolese descent. He continued education until the age of 18, combining studies with his professional career.

Anderlecht

Belgium

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="26147732" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26147732" title="Matty James">
Matty James

Matthew Lee James (born 22 July 1991) is an English professional footballer who plays for Leicester City. His regular position is in midfield, but he can play in defence when required. James began his career with Manchester United, where his brother Reece also came through the youth ranks, but left the club for a spell on loan at Preston North End before joining Leicester on a permanent basis in 2012.

Born in Bacup, Lancashire, James joined the Manchester United Academy at an early age, and made his first appearance for the under-18 side in October 2005, at the age of 14. His next appearance for the under-18s came just over a year later, when he came on as a substitute for Magnus Eikrem in a Premier Academy League fixture against Manchester City. He made a further eight appearances for the under-18s during the 2006–07 season, before establishing himself as a regular in the team in 2007–08, although he began the season filling in in defence. James scored his first goals in a Manchester United shirt during the 2007–08 season, both of them in the league. After making his first appearance for the reserve team in November 2007, James became a regular for the reserves during the 2008–09 season, while remaining a relative mainstay in the under-18 side. At the end of a season in which he had made 22 appearances for the reserves and 14 for the under-18s, James received his first call-up to the Manchester United senior team on 24 May 2009. Given the number 47 jersey, James was named on the bench for the match, but did not take to the field.

James signed his first professional contract with Manchester United in July 2009, before playing in the 1–0 win over Bolton Wanderers in the final of the 2008–09 Lancashire Senior Cup. Prior to the first team's match against Barnsley in the Fourth Round of the League Cup on 27 October 2009, James was given a new squad number (43), and was named as an unused substitute.

In February 2010, James followed in the footsteps of Manchester United teammate Danny Welbeck by signing on loan with Preston North End until the end of the 2009–10 season. He went straight into the Preston first-team for their match against Sheffield United on 9 February 2010, and scored within 10 minutes as his deflected shot from outside the penalty area beat Sheffield United goalkeeper Ian Bennett. James returned to Manchester United at the end of the 2009–10 season, but rejoined Preston on a season-long loan on 2 July 2010.

On 30 December 2010, Sir Alex Ferguson chose to recall Ritchie De Laet, Joshua King and James from their loans at Preston after the sacking of his son. De Laet and King returned immediately, but due to the terms of James' loan, he did not return to Manchester United until 4 January 2011.

On 15 May 2012, Matty James and his Manchester United teammate Richie De Laet moved to Leicester City in a double transfer, for which the fee was undisclosed. The pair each signed three-year contracts. James, along with De Laet and Jamie Vardy, made his competitive debut for Leicester against Torquay United, scoring his first goal for the club (and Leicester's third of the night) as the Foxes ran out 4–0 winners in the League Cup tie. James added another 3 goals (all in the league) over the course of the season, including one in the 3–2 win against Nottingham Forest on the final day of the season, helping Leicester to the final play-off position. James started both legs of the eventual 3–2 aggregate defeat to Watford in the Championship play-off semi final.

James found himself starting more games during the 2013–14 season, being in the line-up for Leicester's first 5 league games before being shown the first red card of his career in the 1–2 defeat to Charlton Athletic, after being shown two yellow cards, a decision that left many perplexed. On 8 February 2014, James scored his only goal of the season, helping Leicester come from 2–0 down to draw 2–2 with Watford. James played 35 times in the league as Leicester won promotion to the Premier League, collecting the Championship trophy along the way.

Having missed the start of the season through injury, James made his first Premier League appearance on 21 September 2014, as a second-half substitute in a 5–3 victory against his former club, Manchester United. On 10 January 2015, James picked up the second red card of his career in the 1–0 victory over Aston Villa, he was given a straight red following a strong challenge on Jores Okore and an ensuing altercation with Ciaran Clark that resulted in Clark receiving a second yellow card himself. In a 2–0 win over Southampton on 9 May, James ruptured his anterior ligaments and was ruled out for between six and nine months.

Due to his injury, James missed the entire 2015–16 campaign, in which the club became the Premier League champions.

At the beginning of the season, James played with Leicester City U23 squad to regain fitness. On 26 November 2016, James returned to the first-team squad against Middlesbrough.

On 25 January 2017, he joined Barnsley on a loan deal until the summer of 2017.

On 19 August 2017, James made his first start for the club since May 2015 in a 2–0 win over Brighton & Hove Albion.

James has played regularly for the England Under-16s and Under-17s sides, and in 2009 he was called up to the Under-19s for the 2009 UEFA European Under-19 Championship. He was named captain and in his first game as skipper, England recorded a 3–2 victory in their opening game against Austria.

James' father, Linton James, played non-league football for Bacup Borough and later worked as assistant manager of the club. His younger brother, Reece James, currently plays for Sunderland. He was educated at Fearns Community Sports College. 



</doc>
<doc id="28376581" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28376581" title="Nampalys Mendy">
Nampalys Mendy

Nampalys Mendy (born 23 June 1992) is a French professional footballer who plays as a defensive midfielder for Leicester City, and is a former French youth international.

Due to his small stature, simple distribution, and reliable style of play, Mendy has been compared to former French international, Claude Makelele. Monaco club scout Didier Christophe, for example, referred to Mendy as a "carbon copy" of Makelele.

After leaving Sporting Toulon in June 2007, Mendy went on trial with the football section of RC Toulon. According to Monaco scout Didier Christophe, the Toulon coaches stated that Mendy was there to "make up the numbers". However, while observing Mendy in training, Christophe noticed the player's intelligence and understanding of the game and recommended him to Dominique Bijotat, who was serving as head of the Monaco youth academy.

On 27 April 2010, Mendy signed his first professional contract, agreeing to a three-year deal with Monaco until June 2013. In July 2010, he was called up to the first team by manager Guy Lacombe for pre-season training, again to make up the numbers with Lacombe missing several players such as Diego Pérez, Nicolas N'Koulou, Park Chu-Young, and Lukman Haruna, who had all participated in the 2010 FIFA World Cup.

On 7 August 2010, Mendy made his professional debut in the club's opening league match against Lyon. He played the entire 90 minutes, receiving a yellow card in the second half. Mendy picked up his first ever red card on 19 August 2011 against Amiens SC, sent off at the 70th minute mark in a 1–1 draw.

During the 2012–13 season, Mendy played a key role in Monaco's promotion back to Ligue 1. Despite the successful season, Mendy decided to leave Monaco at the end of the season after his contract expired.

Mendy was linked to teams such as Manchester United and Arsenal. Despite calling Manchester United his "dream club", Mendy rejected the move to the English side because he wanted to stay in France. After some positive talks with Nice's manager, Claude Puel, Mendy decided to join OGC Nice on a free transfer.

Mendy made his debut on 17 August 2013, in a 2–1 win against Stade Rennais. After club captain Didier Digard left for Real Betis on a free transfer at the end of 2014–15 season, and new captain Mathieu Bodmer was injured, Mendy was named captain.

Mendy made 110 appearances in three seasons for Nice and helped them to a fourth-place finish in Ligue 1 in 2015–16. He had the second highest number of passes behind Thiago Motta (2950), the most passes per game (78), and a passing accuracy of (92%), best of any player not a member of Paris Saint-Germain.

On 3 July 2016, Mendy moved to Premier League champions Leicester City, managed by his former boss at Monaco, Claudio Ranieri, signing a four-year deal for £13 million, a club record at the time. The transfer record was broken again when Ahmed Musa joined Leicester for £16 million five days later, and yet again less than two months later when Islam Slimani joined Leicester for £29 million.

Mendy played his first competitive game for Leicester in a 2–1 defeat to Manchester United in the 2016 FA Community Shield on 7 August, coming on as a 63rd-minute substitute for Andy King. He suffered an ankle injury on his league debut at home against Arsenal on 20 August 2016 and was substituted in the 53rd minute. Mendy was sidelined for more than three months, and did not make his return until 7 December 2016 in a Champions League group stage match away to Porto, playing the entire game in a 5–0 defeat. He ultimately made only four league appearances for the season.

On 31 July 2017, Mendy rejoined Nice on loan.

Mendy is a former French youth international having earned caps at the under-17, under-18, and under-19 levels. With the under-17 team, he went unnoticed by coach Philippe Bergeroo until the 2009 UEFA European Under-17 Football Championship when he was finally called up to the team. Mendy appeared in all three group stage matches as France were eliminated without winning a match. With the under-18 team, he made his debut on 29 October 2009 in a friendly match against the Denmark.

Mendy was initially called up to the under-19 team in August 2010 only to play in the Sendai Cup in Japan, but due to his consistent performances domestically, Monaco coach Guy Lacombe convinced Bergeroo to make him a permanent part of the squad. He was officially called up to the under-19 team for qualification matches for the 2011 UEFA European Under-19 Football Championship. Mendy made his debut with the team in a 3–0 victory over San Marino and appeared as a starter in the next two qualification matches against Montenegro and Austria, as France won both matches to finish the round undefeated.

On 9 November 2010, while still eligible to represent the under-19 and under-20 teams, Mendy was called up to the under-21 team for a friendly match against Russia.

Mendy is the cousin of fellow footballers Bafétimbi Gomis and Alexandre Mendy.

Mendy is a defensive midfielder known for his resilience, intelligence, and good distribution of the ball. Despite his age and size, Mendy has been praised for his mature and robust play, inviting comparison with former France international Claude Makelele.

Monaco



</doc>
<doc id="45277265" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45277265" title="Wilfred Ndidi">
Wilfred Ndidi

Onyinye Wilfred Ndidi (born 16 December 1996) is a Nigerian professional footballer who plays for club Leicester City and the Nigeria national team as a midfielder.

Ndidi made his Belgian Pro League debut with Genk on 31 January 2015 against Charleroi in a 1–0 away defeat. He played the first 74 minutes of the game, before being substituted for Jarne Vrijsen.

During the Belgian League play-off game against Club Brugge, Ndidi scored a long-range goal, which was named the goal of the season in the Belgian league. After receiving an attempted-clearance outside the penalty box, he lofted the ball smoothly over an opposing player before unleashing a ferocious volley into the top right corner. The ball was adjudged to be travelling at over 111 km/h.

On 3 December 2016, Genk agreed a £17 million transfer deal with English champions Leicester City. The deal was confirmed on 5 January 2017.

Ndidi made his debut for the club on 7 January 2017, in a 2–1 win against Everton in the third round of the FA Cup. He made his first Premier League start on 14 January 2017 against Chelsea at home in a 3–0 defeat. In the English FA Cup game against Derby County on 8 February 2017, Ndidi came on in the first half of extra time and scored his first goal for Leicester through a long-range shot. In a 3–1 win over Liverpool on 27 February 2017, Ndidi won 11 of his 14 tackles, a feat bettered only by Chelsea's N'Golo Kanté who made 14 tackles against the same club in January.

Ndidi got his first career red card in a 3–0 loss to Crystal Palace on 16 December 2017 – which also happens to be his birthday.

Ndidi was part of the Nigerian youth setup during his time at Nathaniel Boys of Lagos. While playing the African U-17 Championship with Nigeria, he was excluded along with two other players from the competition as a precaution, following an MRI age test that suggested he was just slightly above the threshold. Notwithstanding, he joined up with his teammates in the U-20 team the following year, forming the bedrock of the midfield. He was called up to the Senior Nigeria national football team on 8 October 2015, making his debut in the friendly game against DR Congo, and playing again a few days later in the 3–0 win against Cameroon, when he replaced John Obi Mikel in the 63rd minute.

He was selected by Nigeria for their 35-man provisional squad for the 2016 Summer Olympics.

In May 2018 he was named in Nigeria’s preliminary 30 man squad for the 2018 World Cup in Russia.



</doc>
<doc id="15753151" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15753151" title="Christian Fuchs">
Christian Fuchs

Christian Fuchs (; born 7 April 1986) is an Austrian professional footballer who plays as a left back for English club Leicester City.

He began his senior career as a teenager at Wiener Neustadt before signing his first professional contract at 17 with SV Mattersburg, challenging for the Austrian Football Bundesliga title and taking part in European competitions. In 2008, he left for Germany, signing for VfL Bochum. After a season on loan at 1. FSV Mainz 05, he signed for FC Schalke 04 in 2011, where he contested the UEFA Champions League but suffered a serious knee injury. In 2015, he signed for Leicester, winning the Premier League in his first season at the club.

A full international for a decade starting from his debut in 2006, Fuchs earned 78 caps for Austria, making him their eighth-most capped player of all time. He played for the nation at UEFA Euro 2008 and UEFA Euro 2016, captaining them for the first time in 2010 and on a permanent basis from 2012, before retiring from international duty in 2016.

Born in Neunkirchen, Lower Austria, and his father was an amateur goalkeeper. He began as a forward at local team SVg Pitten before moving to 1. Wiener Neustädter SC at the age of 11. At the age of 15, while still an amateur and at mainstream school, Fuchs played for their senior team. When he was 17, he signed his first professional deal at SV Mattersburg, a team who despite coming from a town of 6,000 drew league record average crowds of 17,000, came third in the Austrian Football Bundesliga and played in European competition.

Prior to UEFA Euro 2008, he joined the German side VfL Bochum. He later described it as a useful move to play regularly while attracting attention from bigger teams. In 2010, he was signed on loan by 1. FSV Mainz 05, a newly promoted team who ended the season in the top five.

On 6 June 2011, Fuchs signed a contract until 30 June 2015 with Schalke 04. The transfer fee is reportedly undisclosed by Schalke's sport and communications manager Horst Heldt. Fuchs was assigned the number 23 shirt, previously worn by Danilo Fernando Avelar.

In his time at the team from Gelsenkirchen, he competed in the UEFA Champions League, but suffered a long-term knee injury.

On 3 June 2015, Leicester City announced the signing of Fuchs on a free transfer, signing a three-year deal with the Foxes effective from 1 July. Signed under previous manager Nigel Pearson, Fuchs didn't have a regular spot in new manager Claudio Ranieri's squad until October. Fuchs made an appearance in Leicester's third round League Cup tie against West Ham United, providing an assist for Andy King's extra time winner. Following a 2–5 loss to Arsenal on 26 September, Ranieri elected to shake up his defensive back four, inserting Fuchs and teammate Danny Simpson in place of Jeffrey Schlupp and Ritchie De Laet, respectively. Fuchs made his first Premier League start the next week against Norwich.

In his first season, Leicester finished as champions on odds of 5,000–1, making Fuchs the first Austrian to receive a Premier League winners' medal since Arsenal's Alex Manninger in 1998. Following the insertion of Fuchs into the lineup on Matchday 8, Leicester City led the Premier League in clean sheets along with Arsenal, with 15. Fuchs himself led the league during this period in successful tackles with 77, while finishing second in interceptions with 98.

Prior to signing for Leicester, Fuchs had an offer to play in the United States, where his family live, but he turned it down for financial reasons. He said in March 2016 "My intention is to play in the US. I have come [to Leicester] for three years. I decided that I would sign one last contract in Europe, when I left Schalke, then go to the US."

On 21 October 2016, Fuchs signed a new contract with Leicester, keeping him with the club until June 2019. The next day, Fuchs scored his first goal for Leicester against Crystal Palace, volleying home a corner-kick clearance by Christian Benteke for the team's final goal in a 3–1 victory.

Fuchs made his debut for Austria on 23 May 2006 in a friendly match against Croatia, replacing Stefan Lexa for the final six minutes of the 1–4 loss at the Ernst-Happel-Stadion in Vienna.

He was part of the Austrian international squad as they co-hosted UEFA Euro 2008 alongside Switzerland. He made only one appearance in the group stage elimination, playing the entirety of the 1–0 loss to Germany in their last match of the tournament.

On 11 August 2010, in the absence of regular skipper Marc Janko, Fuchs captained his nation for the first time in a 0–1 friendly loss to the Swiss in Klagenfurt. That 17 November, he scored his first international goal, equalising in a 1–2 home friendly loss to Greece.

Fuchs received the armband on a permanent basis at the behest of manager Marcel Koller on 13 August 2012. He played all 10 games as they qualified for UEFA Euro 2016, the first time they did so, and featured in every minute of the group stage elimination in France. Afterwards, he retired from international play with a total of 78 caps, declaring "I am very proud of the 10 years that I have spent with the national team. I did everything with passion and, as I said, I am very, very proud."

Fuchs' wife Raluca Gold-Fuchs, with whom he has a stepson, son, and daughter, is a businesswoman formerly of Goldman Sachs. She lives with their children in Manhattan and Fuchs sees them once a month. He runs a public relations company and a football academy in the same city, and plans to move there permanently after his football career.

The "Leicester Mercury" described Fuchs as "not your stereotypical footballer...[he] has more strings to his bow than an orchestra". He is noted for his online video series "No Fuchs Given", a play on his surname and the English-language obscenity "fuck"; the series consists of himself and teammates doing unusual football-related challenges, such as him and Robert Huth shooting the ball as hard as possible into each other's backsides. His surname "Fuchs" is the German word for "Fox".

Schalke 04

Leicester City

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="37258327" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37258327" title="Rachid Ghezzal">
Rachid Ghezzal

Rachid Ghezzal (; born 9 May 1992) is an Algerian professional footballer who plays as a winger for Premier League club Leicester City and the Algeria national team.

He began his career at Lyon, where he made his debut in October 2012. He played 119 games and scored 13 goals for them across all competitions. In August 2017, he moved to Monaco on a free transfer.

Born in France, Ghezzal represented France at under-20 level. He made his senior debut for his ancestral Algeria in 2015 and was part of their squad at the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations.

Born in Décines-Charpieu, Metropolitan Lyon, in July 2010 Ghezzal signed a five-year "élite" contract with Lyon. After featuring with the club's reserve team in the Championnat de France amateur for two consecutive seasons, ahead of the 2012–13 season, he was promoted to the senior team by manager Rémi Garde and assigned the number 31 shirt. Ghezzal made his senior team debut on 4 October 2012 in a UEFA Europa League group stage away match against Israeli club Ironi Kiryat Shmona; he started the match as Lyon won the contest 4–3.

In the 2013–14 season, Ghezzal suffered a back injury for the first six months of Lyon's campaign, which saw him out of action until 10 January 2014, missing 32 of Lyon's games in the process. He then returned to the squad but did not make any appearances for Lyon for the rest of the season; either being not named in match day squads or being named on the bench. Since January 2016, he had been playing regularly. He finished the 2015–16 season with 8 goals and 8 assists in 29 Ligue 1 matches. In June 2017, Lyon announced that Ghezzal's contract would not be renewed.

On 7 August 2017, Ghezzal joined fellow Ligue 1 team Monaco by signing a four-year contract that would run until June 2021. It was reported that Monaco would pay him a signing bonus of €3 million and a monthly salary of about €180,000. As his Lyon contract had expired on 30 June 2017, he arrived on a free transfer.

On 5 August 2018, Ghezzal joined Premier League side Leicester City, signing a four-year deal. In his first start for the club, he scored his first Leicester goal -a long range strike from outside the box- in a 4–0 win over Fleetwood Town. 

At international senior level, Ghezzal was eligible to represent both France and Algeria and had stated his preference is to represent the latter nation. In 2013, he received the call from France U20 to compete in the Toulon Tournament. However, Ghezzal later chose to play for Algeria, scoring his first goal in March 2016 against Ethiopia.

He is the younger brother of Algerian international Abdelkader Ghezzal.



</doc>
<doc id="49747864" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49747864" title="Hamza Choudhury">
Hamza Choudhury

Hamza Dewan Choudhury (born 1 October 1997) is an English professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Leicester City.

Choudhury began his career at the Leicester City Academy, and at the age of 16 was reportedly monitored by a number of top European clubs. He joined League One leaders Burton Albion on a one-month loan deal on 27 February 2016. He made his debut in the Football League later that same day, coming on as a 77th-minute substitute for Tom Naylor in a 0–0 draw with Walsall at the Pirelli Stadium.
On 6 August 2016, Choudhury signed another loan deal with Burton Albion for the 2016–17 season. On the same day, Choudhury featured in Burton Albion's first ever Football League Championship game, claiming an assist in a 4–3 defeat against Nottingham Forest.

On 19 September 2017, Choudhury debuted for Leicester City coming on as substitute in the 82nd minute of a EFL Cup 3rd round home win against Liverpool. On 28 November 2017, Choudhury made his Premier League debut for Leicester coming on as substitute in the 83rd minute of a home win against Tottenham. His first Premier League start came on 14 April 2018, in a 2–1 away defeat to Burnley.

On 26 May 2018, Choudhury made his debut for the England national under-21 football team, coming on as a substitute during the 2–1 win against China under-21 in the 2018 Toulon Tournament. Choudhury started for England in the next match of the tournament, a 0–0 draw against Mexico.

Choudhury's father is Grenadian and his mother is of Bangladeshi descent. Regarding his ethnicity Hamza has stated: "Both my parents are Bangladeshi and I have been brought up in an Asian family, but I have Caribbean blood in me as my dad is from Grenada. We have a massive family".



</doc>
<doc id="47535692" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47535692" title="Filip Benković">
Filip Benković

Filip Benković (born 13 July 1997) is a Croatian footballer who plays as a centre-back for Celtic, on loan from Leicester City.

Benković was born in Zagreb, the capital of Croatia, and joined the Dinamo Zagreb academy in 2008. 

On 19 July 2015, Benković made his debut for the club in a 1–1 draw with Osijek. On 22 July, Benković made his European debut in a 3–0 win over Fola Esch in the second leg of the third qualifying round of the UEFA Champions League; playing twelve minutes after coming off the bench as a substitute in the 78th minute. He went on to make a total of 18 competitive appearances for the club in the 2015–16 season. 

On 29 July 2016, in the league match against Slaven Belupo, after Dinamo went 0–1 in the 92nd minute, Benković scored a last-minute equalizing goal in the 94th minute, to make it 1–1. On 10 August, Benković played the full 90 minutes in a 4–0 away win over Hajduk Split. On 23 September, Benković scored the winning goal in a 1–0 win over Lokomotiva. In the mid-phase of the 2016–17 season, Benković was reportedly suffering from injury which would force him to miss the majority of the season.

On 15 July 2017, Benković scored in a 2–0 win over Istra 1961. On 9 September, Benković scored in a 3–2 win over Rudeš. On 21 October, Benković scored in a 2–2 draw with Hajduk Split. On 4 May 2018, Benković scored a last-minute equalizing goal in a 2–2 draw with Slaven Belupo. On 23 May, Benković came on as a 90th minute substitute in the Croatian Cup Final, as Dinamo won 1–0.

On 9 August 2018, Leicester City confirmed via their official website that Benković signed for the club on a five-year contract, for a fee in the region of £13m.

On 31 August 2018, Benković joined Celtic on a season-long loan deal. On 14 September 2018, Benković made his debut in a 0–0 draw with St Mirren, playing 60 minutes. Benković scored his first goal for Celtic in a 5–0 dismantling of Heart Of Midlothian on 3 November 2018 .




</doc>
<doc id="12187632" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12187632" title="Adrien Silva">
Adrien Silva

Adrien Sébastien Perruchet da Silva (born 15 March 1989), known as Adrien Silva, is a Portuguese professional footballer who plays for Ligue 1 club Monaco, on loan from Leicester City, and the Portugal national team. A central midfielder, he is known for his dribbling and passing skills.

He began his career with Sporting, making his first-team debut at the age of 18. In ten years with the club he played 237 games and scored 39 goals, and won the 2008 and 2015 Taça de Portugal trophies. He had loan spells with Maccabi Haifa and Académica, where he won the Taça de Portugal again. In 2018 he moved to Leicester, and joined Monaco on loan in January 2019.

Silva won 46 caps for Portugal at youth level, including 13 for the under-21 team. He made his senior debut in 2014 and played at Euro 2016, which Portugal won, and the 2018 World Cup.

Silva was born in Angoulême, Poitou-Charentes, France, to a Portuguese father and a French mother. He began his football career at the age of 10 with FC Girondins de Bordeaux, but after one year there his father, who worked in aeronautics, returned to Portugal and the family settled in Arcos de Valdevez. Silva spent two seasons with local Associação Recreativa e Cultural de Paçô, who later began to host a tournament in his honour, the A.R.C.Paçô–Adrien Silva Tournament, held every June.

Silva then spent six years in Sporting's academy, and won four national and three regional championships. At the age of 15 he was scouted by Chelsea, along with Portugal under-16 teammates Ricardo Fernandes and Fábio Ferreira, and the three players trained at the English club's facilities in January 2005. Sporting filed a complaint with FIFA that Chelsea had not followed the correct procedures, and Silva stayed with Sporting, although Fernandes and Ferreira did later move to the London club.

In March 2007, Silva signed his first professional contract, agreeing to a five-year deal with Sporting. In July, after spending the final two months of the season playing with the reserve team, he was officially promoted to the main squad by manager Paulo Bento ahead of the upcoming campaign. He made his Primeira Liga debut on 17 August, appearing as a late substitute in a 4–1 home win against Académica de Coimbra; on 12 December, after appearing as an unused substitute in several league and European matches, he made his first professional start and Champions League debut in a 3–0 victory over FC Dynamo Kyiv. Four days later he made his first start in the league, in a 2–1 win at C.S. Marítimo.

Silva featured in both legs of Sporting's round of 32 win over Bolton Wanderers in the 2007–08 UEFA Cup. On 16 April he started in the 5–3 victory over Benfica in the semi-final of the Taça de Portugal, being replaced after only 35 minutes in what was the last of his 15 appearances of the season.

As in his first year, Silva struggled for minutes in 2008–09. He played his first match on 22 November 2008 in a 1–0 league win over Associação Naval 1º de Maio, playing 16 minutes off the bench. He made his first start in a 3–0 home win against Marítimo in the Taça da Liga, and he also made Bento's starting XI three months later in the "Lions"' 1–7 defeat to Bayern Munich in the Champions League last 16 second leg. He made 19 appearances in all competitions, notably playing the full 90 minutes in home wins against C.F. Estrela da Amadora and C.D. Nacional.

Silva scored his first career goal in a 2009–10 UEFA Europa League group stage match against Hertha Berlin, the match-winner in a 1–0 win, when he also was sent off after collecting a second yellow card in injury time. On 28 November 2009, in the Lisbon derby, which ended 0–0, he made headlines in the Portuguese media because he covered the most distance of any Sporting player, having traveled over . Coach Carlos Carvalhal started him in 13 of the team's next 15 matches, but he eventually fell out of favour, as Sporting went on to finish in only fourth place with 48 points, the club's worst points total since the 1992–93 campaign.

On 27 June 2010, it was announced that Silva would be joining Israeli side Maccabi Haifa F.C. on a season-long loan deal. The move was facilitated by the player's agent Pini Zahavi, based in Tel Aviv. He made his debut for his new team on 29 July, in the first leg of the Europa League third qualifying round tie against FC Dinamo Minsk; he was rarely played in the Israeli Premier League, but was a regular in the campaign in the Toto Cup.

In January 2011, it was reported that Silva was considering going back to Portugal to regain match fitness. On the 16th, he spoke of his desire, telling daily sports newspaper "A Bola": "Returning to Portugal is an option that I like a lot since I can be followed more closely. In Israel, I don't have great visibility"; Three days later, a six-month loan to Académica de Coimbra was confirmed.

Silva found the net in his first appearance with the "Students", who were defeated 1–2 away against S.C. Olhanense. He was again used rarely, but now due to injury problems – he fractured the fifth metatarsal in his right foot in a game with U.D. Leiria in March, which sidelined him for the rest of the season.

On 5 July 2011, Sporting and Académica extended the loan for a further season. On 26 September, completely recovered from his injury, Silva scored his first career brace in a 4–0 home win against C.D. Feirense; on 19 November, in the fourth round of the Portuguese Cup, he scored his team's second in a 3–0 shock triumph over Porto, adding another double in the next round against Leixões SC (5–2 after extra time). He played the full 90 minutes in the final against Sporting, a 1–0 win which saw the Coimbra side lift its first domestic cup in 73 years.

After returning to Sporting, Silva was awarded the club's Player of the Year award on 28 November 2013. He scored a career-best ten competitive goals in the 2014–15 season, while also helping the team reach and win the final of the Portuguese Cup.

On 31 August 2017, Sporting agreed a £22 million fee for Silva to move to Leicester City, pending international clearance. The documents relating to his transfer did not reach FIFA until 14 seconds after the deadline; thus, he remained ineligible to play for the club until the next transfer window. In an interview with "The Guardian" in March 2018, Silva said it was "a very poor decision" by FIFA, despite his appeals, to uphold his ban.

Silva was officially registered on 1 January 2018, and made his debut that same day as a late substitute in a 3–0 win at home to in the Premier League. He was given the number 14 jersey, referring to his transfer difficulties.

Silva struggled for game time under manager Claude Puel, having not started a league match since 10 August 2018. He made only five appearances in all competitions, and was not included in the squad for a league match after 22 September.

On 31 January 2019, Silva joined AS Monaco FC – coached by his compatriot Leonardo Jardim – on loan until June, with Youri Tielemans moving in the opposite direction. He made his Ligue 1 debut on 2 February, playing 18 minutes in the 2–1 home victory over Toulouse FC after replacing compatriot Gelson Martins.

Though born in France, Silva elected to play for Portugal, and represented the country at every youth level. With the under-16s he appeared at the "Tournoi du Val-de-Marne", featuring in all three group stage matches – however, after he was found to have done unauthorized training with Chelsea, he was suspended by the Portuguese Football Federation. He played with the under-17 team as they attempted to qualify for the 2007 UEFA European Championship, being a regular as the side eventually fell short in the elite round.

On 30 January 2007, the Portuguese Federation announced that Silva would be participating in the 2007 Meridian Cup (for under-18 players) as the country's only representative, and he declared that he was "very proud to represent Portugal in a European selection". However, prior to the start of the competition, he suffered an injury and was replaced by compatriot Romeu Ribeiro.

Silva was limited to only seven appearances with the Portuguese under-19s, due to his increased involvement with Sporting's first team. He scored his first goal in the age group on 6 November 2007, in the first round of qualification for the 2008 European Championship against the Republic of Ireland; despite a 2–1 victory, Portugal failed to progress past the elite stages.

On 5 February 2009, Silva earned his first call up to the under-21 team under coach Rui Caçador, for a friendly match with Switzerland that was played five days later. He started and played 78 minutes, before being substituted in a 3–1 win. He was a regular participant in the qualification campaign for the 2011 European Championships, appearing in five out of nine matches and scoring in a 1–1 draw with Macedonia.

Silva was called up by new Portugal coach Fernando Santos for a friendly in France on 11 October 2014, but did not play in the 1–2 defeat. He made his senior international debut in another friendly, replacing André Gomes midway through the second half of a 1–0 win over Argentina at Old Trafford on 18 November.

Silva was selected for the Euro 2016 squad. His first game in the tournament took place on 25 June, when he played the full 120 minutes in the round of 16 clash against Croatia, a 1–0 win after extra time.

Having also been picked for the 2017 FIFA Confederations Cup, Silva contributed with four appearances as Portugal finished third. He scored his first goal for his country on 2 July, a 104th-minute penalty to help defeat Mexico 2–1 in the third place play-off.

Silva was selected for the 2018 World Cup. He played in three games, and Portugal were knocked out by Uruguay in the second round.

Sporting

Maccabi Haifa

Académica

Portugal





</doc>
<doc id="55527573" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55527573" title="Fousseni Diabaté">
Fousseni Diabaté

Fousseni Diabaté (born 18 October 1995) is a professional footballer who plays as an attacking midfielder or forward for Sivasspor, on loan from Leicester City. Born in France, Diabaté represents Mali internationally.

Diabaté was at the youth academy at Stade Rennais for seven years before being kicked out, and thereafter joined Stade de Reims. He played for the reserves of En Avant de Guingamp before joining Gazélec Ajaccio on 20 June 2017. He made his professional debut with Gazélec Ajaccio in a 1–1 Ligue 2 tie with Valenciennes FC on 28 July 2017, assisting his side's only goal.

On 13 January 2018, Diabaté moved to Leicester City for an undisclosed fee. Two weeks later, he made his debut for Leicester City in the FA Cup fourth round match against Peterborough United and scored twice in a 5–1 win.

He joined Sivasspor on loan in January 2019.

Diabaté made one appearance for the Mali U20s at the 2015 FIFA U-20 World Cup in a 2–0 loss to the Serbia U20s, as well as 5 games at the 2015 African U-20 Championship. He also appeared for the Mali U23s at the 2016 Toulon Tournament.



</doc>
<doc id="43278878" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43278878" title="Bartosz Kapustka">
Bartosz Kapustka

Bartosz Kapustka (born 23 December 1996) is a Polish professional footballer who plays as a winger for OH Leuven, on loan from Leicester City.

Kapustka was signed by Premier League club Leicester City for a reported £7.5m in August 2016, signing a five-year contract. He cited manager Claudio Ranieri as his motivation for joining the club. However, Kapustka did not receive any first team football for the first half of the 2016-17 season and was only named in two match day squads. Ranieri admitted he was unsure when Kapustka "will be ready to play in the Premier League". Having already played for the Leicester Under-23s, a loan move was not possible due to FIFA rules prohibiting a player from appearing for three clubs in one season.

Kapustka finally made his senior debut for Leicester in a 1–2 FA Cup third-round win at Everton on 7 January 2017, coming on as an 84th-minute substitute for Marc Albrighton. He made his full debut in a 3–1 FA Cup fourth-round replay win over Derby County on 8 February 2017, playing in a central attacking role behind striker Ahmed Musa. Kapustka made 47 touches and two interceptions before he was replaced by Riyad Mahrez in the 81st minute.

On 14 July 2017, Kapustka joined Bundesliga club SC Freiburg on loan for 2017–18 season. The Breisgau-based side secured an option to sign him permanently at the end of the season for a transfer fee of €5 million.

On 31 August 2018, Kapustka joined Belgian First Division B club Oud-Heverlee Leuven on loan for 2018–19 season.

On 7 September 2015, Kapustka made his debut appearance for the Poland national team in a match against Gibraltar, substituting Jakub Błaszczykowski. He scored his first goal for the national team on his debut. In the buildup to the Euro 2016, Kapustka was involved in a brawl outside a night club, in which he sustained an injury. Following the incident, he made a phone call personally to Polish national team manager Adam Nawałka, to ask for his forgiveness and ask that he not be excluded from the squad for the upcoming tournament. Kapustka was eventually selected for Poland's Euro 2016 campaign, and produced a standout performance in the team's opening match victory over Northern Ireland.

"Scores and results list Poland's goal tally first."


</doc>
<doc id="45077034" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45077034" title="Callum Elder">
Callum Elder

Callum Roddie Elder (born 27 January 1995) is an Australian professional footballer who plays as a left back for Ipswich Town, on loan from Leicester City. He represented Australia U20 at international level.

A left back, Elder was born in Sydney, Australia and began his youth career with Manly United, before moving to England at the age of 16 to begin a scholarship in the academy at Leicester City. After completing his scholarship at the end of the 2012–13 season, he was awarded his first professional contract. Graduating to the Foxes' U21 team, he progressed to sign a new two-year deal at the end of the 2014–15 season and a further extension a year later, which will keep him at the King Power Stadium until June 2019.

On 8 January 2015, Elder was loaned out to League Two club Mansfield Town for one month. He made his professional debut two days later, starting in a 2–1 away loss against Burton Albion. He became a regular starter, which saw his loan extended to the end of the 2014–15 season. Elder made 21 appearances for the Stags and returned to Leicester at the end of the season.

On 29 August 2015, Elder joined League One side Peterborough United on a one-month loan, which was later extended until January 2016. He made 21 appearances and scored the first senior goal of his career, which came in a 4–0 thrashing of Doncaster Rovers on 24 October 2015. A foot injury suffered in a match versus Blackpool on 19 December led to the early termination of Elder's loan.

On 30 July 2016, Elder joined Championship side Brentford on loan for the duration of the 2016–17 season. He was an ever-present in league matches during the opening month of the season, before suffering a knee injury during a 2–0 win over Brighton & Hove Albion on 10 September 2016. Elder's recovery was delayed by a thigh injury and he returned to the King Power Stadium for treatment in mid-December 2016. He returned to training with Brentford on 16 January 2017, but failed to make an appearance before being recalled by Leicester City two weeks later.

On 31 January 2017, Elder joined Championship club Barnsley on loan until the end of the 2016–17 season.

On 31 July 2017, Elder joined Wigan Athletic on a season long loan. He made his debut on 5 August at Milton Keynes Dons but was sent off in the 44th minute. Wigan won the match 1–0.

On 2 January 2019, Elder joined Ipswich Town on loan for the remainder of the 2018–19 Championship season.

Elder is eligible to play for Australia, Scotland and England at international level. In October 2013, Elder was called up by Australia U20 for the 2014 AFC U19 Championship qualifying matches and made a single appearance in a 3–0 win over Chinese Taipei on 5 October. He was not named in the squad for the tournament finals.

Elder describes himself as "an athletic full back. I like getting up and down the left-hand-side".

Wigan Athletic


</doc>
<doc id="31149948" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31149948" title="Islam Slimani">
Islam Slimani

Islam Slimani (; born 18 June 1988) is an Algerian professional footballer who plays as a striker for Süper Lig club Fenerbahçe on loan from Leicester City and for the Algeria national team.

Slimani began his career in his homeland with JSM Chéraga and CR Belouizdad. In 2013 he moved to Europe, signing for Sporting CP. He played and scored regularly during his three seasons in Portugal, helping his team win the Taça de Portugal in 2015. In 2016, Slimani transferred to Leicester for a club record £28 million fee.

An Algerian international, Slimani made his international debut in 2012 and played at the Africa Cup of Nations in 2013 and the 2015. He was also part of Algeria's squad at the 2014 FIFA World Cup, where he finished as the team's joint top scorer with two goals. As of January 2017, he has won 49 international caps and scored 25 goals, making him Algeria's fourth highest all-time goalscorer.

In May 2009, Slimani joined CR Belouizdad from JSM Chéraga for a transfer fee of 800,000 Algerian dinars, signing a two-year contract. In August, he made his official debut for the club as a starter against MC Oran in the first week of the 2009–10 Algerian Championnat National. He finished his first season with Belouizdad with 8 goals in 30 games.

On 17 May 2011, Slimani scored four goals in a league game against JS Kabylie, leading CR Belouizdad to an impressive 7–1 win. In July 2011, with his contract expired and several French clubs such as Nice and Le Havre showing interest in signing him, Slimani decided to sign a two-year extension with CR Belouizdad.

On 6 August 2013, Slimani joined Sporting CP for an undisclosed fee. He started the 2013–14 season as a substitute, gaining a reputation as an impact player due to him scoring vital goals when coming off the bench. Due to the lack of form of Fredy Montero, however, Slimani became a starter and scored four goals in four matches in early March 2014 against Rio Ave, Braga, Vitória de Setúbal and in 1–0 over rivals Porto. In December 2013 he was considered the best Algerian footballer of the year as he won the Algerian Golden Ball.

In his second season Slimani was successful as he became a key player. His first goal of the season was in the Derby de Lisboa 1–1 away draw to Benfica. At European level Slimani scored his first goal against Schalke 04 at Estádio José Alvalade in the last minute to finish 4–2 for Sporting. At the end of the season he finished third in the league, but in the Taça de Portugal he reached the final against Braga on 31 May 2015, slimani scored a goal helping Sporting turn around a two-goal deficit to eventually secure the cup following a penalty shootout 3–1. where he achieved his first title in his history at the end of the season Slimani played 33 games and scored 15 goals, including 12 in the league.

In the 2015–16 season, Slimani said he would be his last season and aspires to achieve the title of the Primeira Liga absent for 14 years the new and former Benfica coach Jorge Jesus, who said he would rely heavily on Slimani to win the titles and the start was in the Supertaça against Benfica and ended for Sporting with a single goal, achieving his second title. At the start of the tournament, Slimani scored his first goal against Académica in an away match on 4 October 2015, and in the seventh round against Vitória de Guimarães, he scored his first hat-trick in the Portuguese league. At the top of the 15th round, Slimani managed to score two goals against Porto's goalkeeper Iker Casillas to lead the team back to the top of the league. After this game, Slimani scored in four consecutive games 6 goals against Vitória de Setúbal, Braga, Tondela and Paços de Ferreira. After two matches, he returned to score twice at Nacional.

Before Sporting's league derby match at home, Benfica lodged a complaint against Slimani for assaulting Andreas Samaris with his elbow in a Portuguese Cup match on 21 November 2015. After a long wait and one day before the match, the Portuguese League announced that Slimani could participate in the decisive match for the title. However, the team lost 1–0 and dropped to second place, behind Benfica. One week later, he scored his 20th goal this season in the match against Estoril. After this meeting, he scored four goals against Belenenses, Marítimo and Moreirense, and Porto. Slimani contributed to the victory at Estádio do Dragão after scoring two goals. In the final round, he scored the 27 goals against Braga. The match ended 4–0 but was not enough for Sporting to win the league title, as Benfica ended with more two points. That season, Slimani scored 27 goals in the league but finished behind top scorer Jonas, with 32 goals.

For the following season, Sporting wanted to retain Slimani but he insisted on leaving the club, and that was finally accepted by the administration. On 28 August 2016, he played his last match against Porto at Estádio José Alvalade and scored his last goal to finish 2–1 for Sporting.

On 31 August 2016, the last day of the 2016–17 summer transfer window in England, Slimani joined Premier League champions Leicester City on a five-year contract. The transfer fee paid to Sporting was reported as £28 million, a club record for Leicester. Leicester had beaten West Bromwich Albion to sign Slimani.

On 14 September, he made his debut for Leicester in the UEFA Champions League playing 62 minutes in a 3–0 victory over Club Brugge. Three days later, he made his Premier League debut in a 3–0 victory over Burnley, scoring his side's first two goals. On 27 September, Slimani scored the only goal in Leicester's 1–0 win against Porto in the Champions League group stage after a pass from Algerian national teammate Riyad Mahrez. It was his sixth goal with Iker Casillas in goal in 2016, five of which he netted while with his former club Sporting.

After this goal, Slimani failed to score until matchday 11 of the Premier League against West Bromwich Albion from a pass from Mahrez, although Leicester lost 2–1. Later, on matchday 13, after entering as a substitute, Slimani scored the equalizer for his team from the penalty spot in the last minute against Middlesbrough. On matchday 15, Slimani helped the Foxes to win against Manchester City 4–2 after he presented two assists for goalscorers Jamie Vardy and Andy King. On 31 December, after five games without a goal, Slimani scored the winning goal against West Ham United at the King Power Stadium to lead his team to win the fifth in the Premier League this season, the last day of 2016.

Slimani scored four of his five league goals from headers, but had only managed a 38% shot accuracy by January 2017. After his participation in the African Cup, Slimani returned to the club injured, which affected the rest of his season where he did not participate very much and scored only two goals, against Sunderland. and against Everton. In the League Cup match against Sheffield United, he scored two goals.

On 31 January 2018, Slimani signed for Newcastle United on loan until the end of the season. A thigh injury prevented him from making his debut for the club, which eventually happened exactly two months after signing, in a 1–0 win over Huddersfield Town, and he was involved in the build-up for the only goal of the game, scored by Ayoze Pérez. On 15 April, Slimani was again involved in the build-up for the match winning goal in a 2–1 win over Arsenal, after his header was flicked on by Pérez, and into the path of Matt Ritchie.

On 3 May, Slimani was given a three match ban for violent conduct after an off-the-ball incident with West Bromwich Albion's Craig Dawson, effectively ending his season with Newcastle.

On August 11, 2018, Slimani joined Süper Lig club Fenerbahçe on a season-long loan.

In October 2009, Slimani was called up by Abdelhak Benchikha for the first time to the Algeria A' National Team for a week-long training camp in Algiers. In March 2010, Slimani was called up again, this time for a 2011 African Nations Championship qualifier against Libya as a replacement for his injured CR Belouizdad teammate Youcef Saïbi. However, Slimani did not play in the game as Algeria won 1–0.

In May 2012, Slimani was called up for the first time to the Algeria national team for the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifiers against Mali and Rwanda, and the return leg of the 2013 Africa Cup of Nations qualifier against Gambia. On 26 May, he made his debut, coming as a substitute at half-time in a friendly against Niger. A week later, on 2 June, Slimani scored his first international goal for Algeria, netting the third goal in the 4–0 win over Rwanda in the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifiers. He followed that up with another goal against Mali in the next game, and then scored another two goals in the following against Gambia.

Slimani was selected for Algeria's squad taking part in the 2013 Africa Cup of Nations, and played in all three group games in January. Algeria, however, only won one point and were eliminated at the first stage.

Algeria qualified for the 2014 World Cup, with manager Vahid Halilhodžić selecting Slimani for his 23-man squad. On 22 June 2014, Slimani scored the opening goal for "les Fennecs" in a 4–2 group match against South Korea. He also made an assist for the team's third goal by passing the ball to Abdelmoumene Djabou. On 26 June, Slimani scored with a header in Algeria's 1–1 draw with Russia, helping the nation qualify for the knockout rounds of the World Cup for the first time ever after failing to do so previously in 1982, 1986 and 2010. In the round of 16 match against Germany, Slimani had a headed goal disallowed in the first half for offside, while later on, his powerful shot at goal was saved by German goalkeeper Manuel Neuer. Algeria eventually lost 2–1 after extra time, but were praised for an excellent campaign throughout the tournament.

In Algeria's opening match of the 2015 Africa Cup of Nations, Slimani scored the final goal in a 3–1 victory over South Africa.





</doc>
