<doc id="7354854" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7354854" title="Fabinho">
Fabinho

Fabinho is a Portuguese given name, a diminutive form of the Portuguese name "little Fábio". Portuguese also has an augmentative form of the name, Fabão, "big Fábio".



</doc>
<doc id="35611957" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35611957" title="Virgil van Dijk">
Virgil van Dijk

Virgil van Dijk (; born 8 July 1991) is a Dutch professional footballer who plays as a centre back for English club Liverpool and captains the Netherlands national team.

After beginning his career with Groningen, he moved to Celtic in 2013, where he won the Scottish Premiership and was named in the PFA Scotland Team of the Year in both of his seasons, also winning the Scottish League Cup in the latter. In September 2015, he joined Southampton. He joined Liverpool in January 2018 for £75 million, a world record transfer fee for a defender. Van Dijk was involved in reaching the 2018 UEFA Champions League Final during his first spring at Liverpool.

Van Dijk made his international debut for the Netherlands in 2015 and became captain of his country in 2018.

Van Dijk was born in Breda to a Dutch father and Surinamese mother. He began his career as a right-back, but moved to centre-back after growing 18 centimetres during the summer of 2008.

He started his career with Willem II before transferring to Groningen in 2010. As a youth player he initially combined playing with his job as a dishwasher in a restaurant.

He made his professional debut for Groningen coming on as a 72nd-minute substitute for Petter Andersson during the 4–2 victory against ADO Den Haag on 1 May 2011. During the 2011–12 season, Van Dijk made 23 league appearances for the Eredivisie team, scoring his first professional goal during the 6–0 victory against Feyenoord on 30 October 2011. He scored his second professional goal for Groningen on 22 January 2012 against Heracles Almelo in a 2–1 victory before scoring again the following week during a 4–1 defeat to FC Twente. Van Dijk scored his first goal of the season on 7 October 2012, in a 2–2 draw with Feyenoord. He also scored in the reverse fixture against Feyenoord, on 23 December, in a 1–2 defeat.

On 21 June 2013, Van Dijk signed with Celtic for a fee of around £2.6 million, on a four-year deal including a 10% selling-on fee for Groningen. He made his debut on 17 August, replacing Efe Ambrose for the final 13 minutes of a 2–0 Scottish Premiership win over Aberdeen at Pittodrie Stadium. A week later, he made his first start, in a 2–2 draw with Inverness Caledonian Thistle at Celtic Park. On 9 November, Van Dijk scored his first Celtic goals, heading one in each half of a 4–1 win against Ross County. After a solo run, he scored within five minutes the only goal of a victory over St Johnstone on 26 December.

Van Dijk scored again on 26 January 2014, in a 4–0 win versus Hibernian for Celtic's 11th consecutive league win. On 25 February, he was sent off after 13 minutes of an eventual 2–1 loss at Aberdeen, for a professional foul on Peter Pawlett; it was Celtic's first defeat of the season. With Celtic having already won the league, Van Dijk netted again on 7 May to put his team 3–1 up away to St Johnstone, in an eventual 3–3 draw. He was one of three Celtic players named in the PFA Scotland Team of the Year.

On 22 July 2014, Van Dijk and Teemu Pukki each scored twice in a 4–0 home win over KR in a UEFA Champions League qualifier, putting their team into the next round 5–0 on aggregate. His first goal of the Premiership season came on 9 November, finishing from Stefan Johansen's last-minute corner for a 2–1 win at Aberdeen. Three weeks later, Van Dijk scored the first and last goals of Celtic's 4–0 win versus Heart of Midlothian in the fourth round of the Scottish Cup. Four days after that, his sixth goal of the season was enough for victory in a home match against Glasgow neighbours Partick Thistle.

Van Dijk was again on target on 21 January 2015, opening a 4–0 home win over Motherwell. On 26 February, he was sent off in the 36th minute against Inter Milan for a foul on Mauro Icardi, as Celtic lost 1–0 on the night, 4–3 on aggregate in the last 32 of the UEFA Europa League. He was again sent off on 8 March in the Cup quarter-final away to Dundee United at Tannadice Park, receiving a red card after eleven minutes for a confrontation with Calum Butcher. His suspension for the following week's Scottish League Cup Final was overturned on appeal, as was that of Paul Paton, who was sent off when mistaken for Butcher. Van Dijk played the full 90 minutes of the final at Hampden Park, which Celtic won 2–0. On 18 March, Celtic's third consecutive match against Dundee United, Van Dijk scored in the last minute to confirm a 4–0 win in a Cup replay.

On 19 April, Celtic contested the Cup semi-final against Inverness at Hampden, and Van Dijk opened the scoring with a free kick. After the dismissal of goalkeeper Craig Gordon, Celtic fell 3–2, ending their chance of a treble. Three days later, again from a free kick, he confirmed a 2–1 win away to Dundee. His team again won the league, and Van Dijk was included in the league's Team of the Season for the second consecutive campaign.

Van Dijk was reportedly "considering his future" in Glasgow after Celtic were knocked out of the 2015–16 UEFA Champions League in the qualifying rounds to Malmö of Sweden.

On 1 September 2015, Van Dijk signed a five-year contract with Premier League club Southampton for a reported £13 million transfer fee.

He made his debut for Southampton on 12 September in a 0–0 draw against West Bromwich Albion at The Hawthorns. Two weeks later, Van Dijk marked his third Premier League appearance with his first goal for the club, which came in the form of a header in the 11th minute to put Southampton in front, following a set-piece from James Ward-Prowse in a 3–1 home win over Swansea City. On 7 May 2016, Van Dijk signed a new six-year contract with the Saints.

On 22 January 2017, he was named team captain of Southampton, after the departure of José Fonte. On the same day, he suffered an ankle injury against Leicester City. This ruled him out of the 2017 EFL Cup Final, which Southampton lost to Manchester United at Wembley Stadium.

After a successful 2016–17 season at Southampton, Van Dijk was subject to interest from Liverpool, who apologised to Southampton for an illegal approach for the player after having reportedly made clear his interest in a move to Liverpool. On 7 August 2017, Van Dijk handed in a transfer request to Southampton and released a statement along with it, emphasising his wish to join a different club in the transfer window.

Van Dijk remained with Southampton for the start of the 2017–18 season and made his first appearance since being injured in January, coming on as a late substitute in a 1–0 victory at Crystal Palace on 26 September. He made what turned out to be his final appearance for Southampton on 13 December 2017, in a 4–1 home defeat to Leicester. It was also his last appearance in any of Southampton's matchday squads, as he was omitted from the squad for the rest of his tenure at the club in light of speculation surrounding his future.

On 27 December 2017, it was announced that Van Dijk would join Liverpool when the winter transfer window opened on 1 January 2018 for a reported fee of £75 million. Former club Celtic would receive 10% of Van Dijk's transfer fee, due to a sell-on clause placed in his Southampton contract. Southampton claimed the undisclosed transfer fee would constitute a world record fee in football for a defender.

He made his debut for Liverpool on 5 January in the third round of the FA Cup and scored the winning goal with a late header in a 2–1 victory against local rivals Everton. In doing so, he became the first player since Bill White in 1901 to score on his debut in the Merseyside derby. Van Dijk and Dejan Lovren built a strong partnership at the heart of Liverpool's defence, with the Dutchman being credited for improving Liverpool's previous defensive issues.

Van Dijk was included in the UEFA Champions League Squad of the Season, despite playing just half of the season in the Champions League, with the "UEFA Technical Observers" saying: "Van Dijk arrived at Anfield and provided composure and stability in the competition's knockout stages." Van Dijk played the full 90 minutes in the 2018 UEFA Champions League Final against Real Madrid, which Liverpool lost 1–3. Van Dijk played 22 games in all competitions in his first season with the club, scoring 1 goal.

On 20 August 2018, Van Dijk was voted Man of the Match by BBC Sport and Sky Sports for his performance in a 2–0 win over Crystal Palace. Van Dijk received the Liverpool Standard Chartered Player of the Month award for his performances in August. On 2 December, Van Dijk was awarded an assist for the winning goal in a derby match against city rivals Everton. Liverpool won 1–0 thanks to Divock Origi's 96th minute goal, set up by a Van Dijk volley and a subsequent error from Everton goalkeeper Jordan Pickford. The Dutchman was ultimately awarded the PFA Player of the Month for November 2018. On 21 December, Van Dijk scored his first goal in the Premier League for Liverpool in a 2–0 away win against Wolverhampton Wanderers. The Dutchman continued his impressive form in the 2018–19 season by winning the Premier League Player of the Month prize for December 2018. 

On 27 February 2019, Van Dijk scored twice in a 5–0 win against Watford. The following month, he scored once - his first goal in the Champions League for the club - and assisted another in a 3–1 win over Bayern Munich. In doing so, he became the first player since Craig Bellamy in 2007 to score and assist a goal for Liverpool in a knock-out stage match away from home in the competition.

Van Dijk made his full international debut for Netherlands on 10 October 2015, in a 2–1 victory away from home against Kazakhstan in a UEFA Euro 2016 qualifier.

He was awarded the captaincy of his country by manager Ronald Koeman on 22 March 2018, and his first match as captain was a 1–0 home friendly defeat by England the next day. On 26 March, he scored his first international goal to conclude a 3–0 win over European champions Portugal at the Stade de Genève. On 13 October, he scored in a 3–0 win over 2014 World Cup champions Germany in the UEFA Nations League.

Van Dijk is a right-footed centre back, who usually features on the left-hand side of central defence, although he can also play as a right-sided centre back.

Neil McGuinness, senior scout at Celtic when Van Dijk was signed, called him "everything you would want if you could create a profile of the ideal central defender", praising him as a "very smooth ball-playing defender" who possesses aerial prowess, skills from dead ball situations, and "strong leadership qualities", while commenting that since his move to England, he is "more tactically aware now [...] his anticipation and timing has improved and he is a lot more of an all-rounder". McGuinness believes Van Dijk's "biggest problem" is that he "can switch off when the game is comfortable".

Van Dijk commonly uses only his first name on the kit. According to his uncle Steven, this is because of a feud with his father.

Celtic

Liverpool

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="10678321" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10678321" title="Georginio Wijnaldum">
Georginio Wijnaldum

Georginio Gregion Emile Wijnaldum (; born 11 November 1990) is a Dutch professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Premier League club Liverpool and the Netherlands national team.

A youth product of Eredivisie side Feyenoord, Wijnaldum became the youngest player ever to represent the club when he made his debut in 2007, and went on to play 134 matches over the course of a five-year spell. Following his departure from Feyenoord, Wijnaldum spent four seasons at PSV where he won the KNVB Cup in the first season and the Eredivisie in his last. He also earned the Dutch Footballer of the Year award during his time with PSV. In 2015, Wijnaldum joined Premier League side Newcastle United for £14.5 million, before departing following the club's relegation a year later to join Liverpool in a £23 million deal.

Wijnaldum is also a full Dutch international, having earned more than 50 caps since making his debut in 2011, and was a member of the squad which came third at the 2014 FIFA World Cup.

Wijnaldum was born and raised in Rotterdam, South Holland. When he was six years old, his parents, who are both of Afro-Surinamese descent, went through a divorce with the result that his mother moved to Amsterdam. However, Wijnaldum decided to stay in Rotterdam and moved in with his grandmother, where he lived for the remainder of his childhood.

In Wijnaldum's younger years, he never showed interest in football. He never played with a ball or watched football on TV. His ambition was to become a gymnast or acrobat. This changed when Wijnaldum's cousin asked him to come to Sparta Rotterdam's opening day with him; then he was invited to the Sparta Rotterdam youth academy and his love for football started to grow slowly.

Wijnaldum has two younger brothers, one of whom, Giliano Wijnaldum, currently plays for Sparta Rotterdam, as well as a half-brother, Rajiv van La Parra, who currently plays for Huddersfield Town. Wijnaldum was formerly known as Georginio Boateng, but following his mother's divorce, he took her maiden name (Wijnaldum).

At age six, Wijnaldum developed himself rapidly at Sparta Rotterdam, winning two championship titles in his first two seasons. Soon Ajax, PSV and Feyenoord showed interest in the youngster, but Wijnaldum declined all offers: "I didn't watch football on TV and I didn't know any of the first team players of Sparta or any of the top clubs. I only knew the real famous players of "Oranje", so the offers didn't impress me much. I had a good time at Sparta, I wanted to stay." After playing for Sparta Rotterdam for seven seasons and representing the Netherlands at various youth levels, Wijnaldum decided to accept a new Feyenoord offer. He was convinced playing for Feyenoord was better for his development as a football player and believed in Feyenoord's vision.

At Feyenoord, Wijnaldum joined a successful generation with the likes of Leroy Fer and Luís Pedro. Wijnaldum stood out as an exceptional talent. In January 2007, a few weeks after turning 16, Wijnaldum was invited to the first team's training camp in Belek, Turkey, by Feyenoord manager Erwin Koeman.

On 8 April 2007, Wijnaldum made his official debut in Feyenoord's starting line-up in the Eredivisie home match against Groningen (0–4). At the age of 16 and 148 days, Wijnaldum became the youngest player ever to play in Feyenoord's first team and was chosen Feyenoord's man of the match. On 2 December 2007, Wijnaldum scored his first Eredivisie goal for Feyenoord, against Heracles Almelo in a 6–0 home win.

In the 2008–09 season, Wijnaldum made his official European debut. On 18 September 2008, he was named in the starting line-up in the UEFA Cup home match against Kalmar FF (0–1). On 2 October 2008, he scored his first European goal for Feyenoord in the return match against Kalmar FF, which resulted in a 1–2 win and a place in the competition's group stage.

On 6 March 2009, Wijnaldum signed a new contract at Feyenoord which would have kept him at De Kuip until summer 2012. On 27 February 2011, he helped his struggling Feyenoord to a 5–1 demolition of Groningen, scoring four goals. He scored two goals from open play in the first half and two more from the penalty spot to add his total for the season to eight goals.

On 29 June 2011, the technical director of Feyenoord announced the club had reached a transfer deal for Wijnaldum reported to be worth €5 million with PSV. On the opening day of the 2011–12 Eredivisie season, Wijnaldum made his debut for PSV in a 3–1 loss against AZ. On 21 August 2011, Wijnaldum scored his first goal for PSV in a 3–0 victory against ADO Den Haag. Since joining the club, Wijnaldum established himself in the starting 11 as he scored goals and developed assists from his attacking role in midfield in Eredivisie, the KNVB Cup and the UEFA Europa League. After the retirement of Mark van Bommel and the departure of Kevin Strootman in the summer of 2013, Wijnaldum was named PSV's captain for the 2013–14 Eredivisie season. However, he played just 11 matches that year, scoring four goals, due to a back injury. For the 2014–15 Eredivisie season, Wijnaldum returned to full fitness and captained PSV to their first Eredivisie title since 2008.

On 11 July 2015, Wijnaldum joined English Premier League club Newcastle United on a five-year contract, for a reported transfer fee of £14.5 million, making him the most expensive signing of Mike Ashley's ownership. Wijnaldum made his debut on 9 August as Newcastle began the season with a 2–2 home draw against Southampton, heading in a goal from Gabriel Obertan's cross. He would score his second Newcastle goal in a 2–2 draw with Chelsea on 26 September. On 18 October, Wijnaldum scored four goals in a 6–2 home win over Norwich City, becoming only the second Newcastle player to score more than three goals in a Premier League match. Wijnaldum was considered the player of the match in a game against Liverpool when he forced Martin Škrtel into an own goal as well as scoring himself in a 2–0 win. He scored against Manchester United in a 3–3 draw on 12 January 2016, and again four days later in a 2–1 win against West Ham United, and later scored twice against Tottenham Hotspur in a 5–1 win on the final day of the season, finishing the season as Newcastle's top goalscorer. However, after the season, Newcastle were relegated to the Championship.
On 22 July 2016, Wijnaldum returned to the Premier League, signing for Liverpool on a five-year contract, for an initial £23 million with a further £2 million in conditional add-ons. He was given the number 5 shirt.

Wijnaldum made his Premier League debut for Liverpool against Arsenal on 14 August 2016, where he played 80 minutes and provided an assist for Adam Lallana before being replaced by Kevin Stewart. He scored his first goal for the club in a 6–1 thrashing of Watford on 6 November. On 31 December, he scored the match's only goal with a powerful header in Liverpool's 1–0 win over Manchester City to take Liverpool four points clear in second. He was highly praised for his goal. Wijnaldum sealed Liverpool's 3–1 win over Arsenal on 4 March 2017 with a close-range finish in stoppage time. In the final match of the 2016–17 Premier League season, with Liverpool needing a win over Middlesbrough to secure a top-four finish and a 2017–18 UEFA Champions League berth, Wijnaldum opened the scoring with a first-half stoppage time goal as Liverpool won 3–0.
On 28 October 2017, Wijnaldum scored his first goal of the 2017–18 season, scoring the third goal in Liverpool's 3–0 win over newly-promoted Huddersfield Town. On 2 May 2018, Wijnaldum scored his first away goal since May 2015, and his first for an English club, when he netted in a 7–6 aggregate victory over Roma to help Liverpool progress to the final of the 2017–18 Champions League. His goal also saw Liverpool break the competition's record for the most goals scored in a single campaign, with the club's tally of 46 surpassing the record of 45 previously held by Barcelona. Wijnaldum played for Liverpool in the 2018 UEFA Champions League Final against Real Madrid, playing the full 90 minutes as Liverpool lost 1–3.

On 15 September 2018, Wijnaldum scored his first ever Premier League away goal, scoring the opening goal in a 2–1 win over Tottenham Hotspur. He made his 100th appearance for the club on 29 September in a 1–1 Premier League draw with Chelsea. On 9 February 2019, He scored his 9th league goal for the club in a 3-0 victory over AFC Bournemouth

Wijnaldum was one of the key players of the Netherlands under-17 squad on the 2007 UEFA European Under-17 Championship in Belgium. However, the team finished third in their group behind England and Belgium, failing to qualify for the knockout stage. Quickly after the tournament, Wijnaldum was selected for the Netherlands under-19 squad. Despite excellent individual performances, the team underachieved and failed to qualify for the 2008 UEFA European Under-19 Championship in the Czech Republic and 2009 UEFA European Under-19 Championship in Ukraine.

On 12 November 2008, the young midfielder got invited to the Netherlands B by manager Johan Neeskens. Wijnaldum had to deny the invitation due to an injury.

Wijnaldum had to deny his first Netherlands under-21 invitation on 9 August 2009. He received an invitation for the friendly match against England by manager Cor Pot. Wijnaldum made his official Netherlands U21 debut on 4 September 2009, in the 2011 UEFA European Under-21 Championship qualification match against Finland (2–0).

On 30 May 2011, Wijnaldum was named in the Netherlands senior squad for friendlies against Brazil and Uruguay, but did not play in either match. He made his international debut in the match against San Marino on 2 September 2011, appearing as a substitute in the 86th minute and promptly scoring the final goal in an 11–0 win.

Wijnaldum was a member of the Netherlands squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup, and scored his second goal for the nation in a 3–0 win against Brazil in the third-place play-off.

On 9 September 2018, he made his 50th appearance for the Netherlands in a 2–1 UEFA Nations League defeat to France.

PSV

Liverpool

Netherlands

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="14704742" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14704742" title="Dejan Lovren">
Dejan Lovren

Dejan Lovren (; born 5 July 1989) is a Croatian professional footballer who plays as a centre back for club Liverpool and the Croatia national team.

Lovren began his career at Dinamo Zagreb before moving to Olympique Lyonnais in January 2010. He spent three-and-a-half seasons with the Ligue 1 team and won the 2012 Coupe de France before he signed for Southampton in 2013. After one season with Southampton, he joined Liverpool for £20 million and has since made over 150 appearances for the club.

Having previously represented Croatia at various youth levels, he made his senior debut in 2009 and has since gone on to make over 40 appearances for his country. He was selected in Croatia's squads for the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil and the 2018 FIFA World Cup in Russia, the latter of which were beaten finalists against France.

Lovren was born to Croatian parents in the city of Zenica, SFR Yugoslavia (now Bosnia and Herzegovina). His family fled from Yugoslavia to Munich to escape the Bosnian War when Lovren was three years old, and he spent the next seven years in Germany.

His family eventually had to leave as they did not possess necessary documentation to reside in Germany and settled in Karlovac, Croatia, 50 kilometres southwest of the capital city of Zagreb. Lovren initially found settling in Croatia difficult, and struggled in school for a couple of years due to his unfamiliarity with the Croatian language. His younger brother Davor is also a footballer.

Lovren first played football in Germany with Munich-based BSC Sendling. After moving to Croatia, he played for local teams NK Ilovac and NK Karlovac as a youth before joining GNK Dinamo Zagreb in 2004.

On 10 May 2006, he made his debut for Dinamo in a Croatian First Football League match against NK Varteks Varaždin. On 17 July 2006, Lovren was loaned to NK Inter Zaprešić for two seasons where he made 50 league appearances and scored one goal. Following his return from loan Lovren regularly featured in Dinamo's starting XI, appearing in 38 matches throughout the 2008–09 season and scoring three goals. In the 2009–10 season, he featured in all four of Dinamo's UEFA Champions League qualifiers against Pyunik Yerevan and Red Bull Salzburg, and managed to score a header against Pyunik.

In January 2010, Lovren signed for French Ligue 1 club Olympique Lyonnais for €8 million plus €1.5 million in incentives on a four-and-a-half-year contract. He made his competitive debut on 24 January 2010 in their 2–1 defeat at AS Monaco in the Coupe de France, playing the full match. His Ligue 1 debut came on 31 January in Lyon's 2–1 win at home against Paris Saint-Germain, once again playing the full 90 minutes. During the second half of the season, he made 10 appearances, mostly as a substitute. He was not allowed to participate in Lyon's matches in the UEFA Champions League that season as he had already played in the competition for Dinamo Zagreb.

Lovren's playing time increased during the 2010–11 season following the departure of two other defenders, Jean-Alain Boumsong and Mathieu Bodmer, in the summer of 2010. During the season, he gradually established himself as a first team regular starter, playing as a centre-back alongside Cris as well as being used as a right or left full-back, demonstrating himself as a versatile defender. In November 2010 Lovren was listed in the "Don Balón" list of the 100 best young players in the world.

On 23 January 2012, Lovren extended his contract with Lyon for two more seasons, signing with the French club until 2016. He started for Lyon in the 2012 Coupe de France Final, a 1–0 win over Quevilly, but was substituted after 18 minutes for Bakary Koné.

On 14 June 2013, Lovren signed for Southampton on a four-year contract for an undisclosed fee, which was estimated at £8.5 million. He made his debut on 17 August 2013, in a 1–0 win against West Bromwich Albion. He scored his first goal for Southampton against Liverpool at Anfield on 21 September 2013, a goal which proved to be the winner. On 19 October, he assisted Adam Lallana for the equalising goal against Manchester United in a 1–1 draw at Old Trafford. He added a second league goal in a 2–2 away draw against Sunderland on 18 January 2014, but was stretchered off late in the game and required hospital treatment after the match. On 23 January, it was announced that along with midfielder Gastón Ramírez, Lovren would be out for six-to-eight weeks with ankle ligament damage.

At the conclusion of his first season in the Premier League, Lovren was named in Bloomberg Sports' Power 50 list, which provides statistical rankings of performances from players in Europe's top five leagues. He was the fifth-highest ranked player from the Premier League in 31st position. After much speculation regarding Lovren's future following the departures of Adam Lallana, Luke Shaw and Rickie Lambert from Southampton, the "Liverpool Echo" reported on 25 July 2014 that Southampton had agreed a fee with Liverpool for the sale of Lovren, who was set to undergo a medical at the Merseyside club after reportedly handing in a transfer request at Southampton.

On 27 July 2014, Lovren became the third Southampton player that transfer window to join Liverpool, after Rickie Lambert and Adam Lallana. He signed a four-year deal for a reported fee of £20 million, becoming the most expensive defender in Liverpool's history until Virgil van Dijk joined the club in 2018.

On 10 August 2014 he made his debut in a friendly for Liverpool against Borussia Dortmund at Anfield, scoring the second goal in a 4–0 victory, and made his competitive debut on 17 August in the club's opening game of the Premier League season, playing the full 90 minutes in a 2–1 win over former club Southampton at Anfield. He scored his first official goal for Liverpool on 28 October, when he headed in the game-winner from a free-kick in a fourth round League Cup 2–1 victory over Swansea City. However, following his poor performance in a Champions League defeat to Basel, Lovren was dropped from the first team. As the last penalty taker, Lovren put his attempt over the crossbar as Liverpool lost in a penalty shootout to Beşiktaş on 26 February 2015 as they were eliminated from the last 32 of the UEFA Europa League. The "Telegraph" website included Lovren in a feature about the 2014–15 Premier League's 20 worst signings which remarked on the number of his errors that resulted in opposition goals.

Lovren regained his place in the lineup for the first three games of the 2015–16 season and performed well securing three clean sheets and seven points. However, following a pair of defeats to West Ham United and rivals Manchester United in which the defence conceded six goals, Lovren again lost his place to Mamadou Sakho. On 8 November he came on as a substitute for Sakho in a 2–1 defeat to Crystal Palace at Anfield, with Sakho sustaining a knee injury that ruled him out for two months. On 13 December, in a 2–2 draw against West Bromwich Albion, Lovren was stretchered off the pitch in the 79th minute due to injury and was replaced by Divock Origi. The following 14 April, Lovren scored a stoppage-time winning goal in a 4–3 Europa League quarter-final win over Borussia Dortmund. Having endured a difficult start to his career at Liverpool, by the end of the 2015–16 season under Jürgen Klopp, Lovren was described as having transformed into a "calm and composed" leader on the pitch by the "Liverpool Echo".

On 28 April 2017, Lovren extended his contract with Liverpool, until 2021.

On 17 December 2017, Lovren scored his first goal of the season in a 4–0 win over Bournemouth; a result which saw Liverpool become the first team in Premier League history to win four consecutive away league matches by a margin of at least three goals. After Virgil van Dijk's arrival on 1 January, he and Lovren built a steady partnership at the heart of Liverpool's defence. On 14 January 2018, Lovren captained Liverpool for the first time in a 4–3 win against Manchester City. On 13 May, Lovren scored his second goal of the season in a 4–0 win over Brighton and Hove Albion, which secured Liverpool's qualification for the UEFA Champions League next season.

Lovren has made 54 appearances and scored six goals for various Croatian youth national teams. He received his first call–up to Croatian national team in August 2009 by manager Slaven Bilić, who included the player in his match squad against Belarus. Lovren was an unused substitute, but still was reportedly delighted with the new experience. He made his debut against Qatar on 8 November 2009, coming on as a substitute for Danijel Pranjić.

On 2 September 2011, Lovren scored his first international goal, against Malta in a UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying match. He was included by manager Slaven Bilić in the preliminary 23-man squad for UEFA Euro 2012 but had to withdraw because of injury one week before the tournament. Lovren scored his second goal for Croatia on 26 March 2013 in a 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifying match against Wales at Liberty Stadium in Swansea. It was an equalizer that leveled the match after Gareth Bale had given Wales the lead from a penalty which Lovren conceded. Croatia eventually won the game 1–2.

In May 2014, Lovren was named in manager Niko Kovač's provisional 30-man squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil. In the opening match of the tournament, on 12 June against the hosts Brazil in São Paulo, Lovren was judged by the Japanese referee Yuichi Nishimura to have fouled Fred in the 69th minute when the score was 1–1. A controversial penalty was given, which was converted by Neymar and led to Brazil's eventual 3–1 win.

Lovren's deteriorating relationship with manager Ante Čačić ultimately resulted in him being left out of Croatia's squad for UEFA Euro 2016.

In May 2018, he was named in Croatia's squad for the 2018 World Cup in Russia. He then featured throughout the competition as Croatia reached the final where they lost to France.

On 11 September, Lovren missed Croatia's debut match in the inaugural edition of UEFA's new tournament Nations League, the team's 6–0 historical defeat to Spain, due to injury. He came back a month later for a match against England, that ended up as a goalless draw. On 15 November, he took part in Spain's 3–2 defeat. After the match, Lovren sparked controversy after calling the Spain team "a bunch of pussies" on an Instagram live stream and admitting that he deliberately elbowed Spanish defender Sergio Ramos, whom he had a feud in the media with prior to the match. Three days later, Croatia suffered a 2–1 defeat to England and got relegated from League A to League B of the next edition of the Nations League.

Due to showing disrespect towards the Spanish national team and flag and a deliberate elbowing of Sergio Ramos, on 11 January 2019 UEFA banned Lovren for one international match, a UEFA Euro 2020 qualifying match against Azerbaijan.

He speaks Croatian, German, English and French.

Lovren first became involved in an on and off relationship with Anita Sekulić in 2005, when he was aged 16. The couple went through a crisis during Lovren's life in Lyon, splitting up for a short time, but then reconciled. Soon after, Sekulić got pregnant and the couple married in July 2012. On 28 August of the same year, the couple became parents of a daughter named Elena. In June 2013, the couple married in a church. On 21 June 2015, they became parents of a son, Josip, named after Dejan's paternal grandfather.
In 2016, the public found out about Anita's affair with a forestry worker Dario Torbić, an old friend of hers. Lovren tried and managed to win her back with a make-or-break holiday in June, since he was not chosen for Croatia's Euro 2016 squad.
In 2013, Lovren founded a fashion brand "Russell Brown" with his best man Lovro Krčar. Three years after, the brand was shut down due to unknown reasons. Rumours suggest that the reason for the closure was due to a poor relationship between Lovren and Krčar. In May 2018, he founded another brand "Rock Filius". On 29 May 2018, Lovren opened a four star hotel "Joel" in Novalja, near Zrće.
During 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil, paparazzi leaked explicit photos of several Croatian internationals taking a "skinny dip" in the pool of the Brazilian hotel they resided in. Lovren was the one who reportedly suffered the most since almost his entire body was exposed.

Source:

Dinamo Zagreb

Inter Zaprešić

Lyon

Liverpool

Croatia

Individual

Orders



</doc>
<doc id="161459" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=161459" title="James Milner">
James Milner

James Philip Milner (born 4 January 1986) is an English professional footballer who plays for club Liverpool. A versatile player, he has been used in many different positions such as on the wing, in midfield and at full back.

Milner's talent in football, cricket, and long-distance running was recognised at a very young age. He represented his school in these sports and played football for amateur teams from Rawdon and Horsforth. He supported Leeds United from a young age and was a season ticket holder at the club. In 1996, he joined the Leeds United youth academy. He made his debut for the first team in 2002 aged only 16 and gained prominence as the youngest player to score in the Premier League.

While at Leeds United, he spent time on loan at Swindon Town to gain experience as a first-team player. Following his move to Newcastle United, he was loaned to Aston Villa for a season. He went on to make over 100 appearances for Newcastle, before returning to Aston Villa on a permanent transfer in 2008. After playing an influential role in Aston Villa's run to the 2010 League Cup Final and being named 2009–10 PFA Young Player of the Year, Milner joined Manchester City for a reported £26m transfer fee in 2010, going on to win the 2011–12 and 2013–14 Premier League titles, 2010–11 FA Cup and 2013–14 League Cup. After five seasons with Manchester City, Milner signed for Liverpool on a free transfer in 2015.

Milner made a record 46 appearances for the England national under-21 football team, playing at the 2007 and 2009 UEFA European Under-21 Championships. He also played 61 appearances for the full English national team, scoring once against Moldova. He was selected for the 2010 and 2014 FIFA World Cup squads, as well as the 2012 and 2016 UEFA Euro Championships. Milner retired from international football in 2016.

Born in Wortley, Leeds, Milner played most of his childhood football for Westbrook Lane Primary School in Horsforth. He was later educated at Horsforth School. Graeme Coulson, a coach from Rawdon, recognised Milner's talent and persuaded him to play for Rawdon in several tournaments, including a tournament at Rawdon Meadows, where Milner scored four goals in their victory in the final.
Milner was described as a "first class" student at his school; he left with 11 GCSEs and an award for his performance in physical education.

Milner played for the Yorkshire Schools cricket team, was the cross-country champion at his school for three consecutive years and was the district champion over 100 metres for two years in a row. He then completed his studies at Boston Spa School, a sports college which was a partner to the football club.

Milner supported his hometown club Leeds United from a young age. His earliest memory of the team was watching them win the FA Youth Cup in 1993. He and his parents, Peter and Lesley, were season ticket holders and Milner later became a ball boy for the club.

When Milner was 10 years old, he joined the Leeds United Academy after being spotted by a scout while playing for Westbrook Juniors in Horsforth. At the academy, Milner played against contemporaries from other clubs in the north, including future Manchester United striker Wayne Rooney. His role model was Leeds-born Alan Smith, who was then a Leeds United striker. Milner believed playing with Smith put him through a learning curve, as Smith had done what Milner aspired to do; that is, to come through the academy and play for the first team. Having made good progress at the Academy, Milner was taken on as a trainee after leaving school. However, his father insisted that he attend college once a week to continue his education.

Milner continued to excel in the youth team, and played for England at under-15 and under-17 levels. He helped the England under-17 team win the 2002 Nationwide summer tournament against Italy, Czech Republic and Brazil, scoring a goal against Brazil.

Milner's first-team debut for Leeds came on 10 November 2002, in a match against West Ham United, when he came on as a substitute for Jason Wilcox for the last six minutes. The appearance made him the second youngest player ever to play in the Premier League, at the age of 16 years and 309 days. On 26 December 2002, he became at 16 years and 356 days the youngest player to score in the Premier League, with a goal in a 2–1 win against Sunderland. His record was broken by James Vaughan of Everton in 2005.

In a match against Chelsea a month later, Milner scored again, with a deft first touch of the ball and manoeuvre, in order to avoid a tackle from Chelsea defender Marcel Desailly, that won widespread praise from commentators. The manoeuvre created a yard of space for him to deliver a curling shot from . Reporters were impressed by his overall performance in the match, especially by his desire, confidence, and ability with both feet. Chelsea manager Claudio Ranieri remarked after the match that Milner had performed like a much more experienced player. The performance prompted comparisons to England internationals Michael Owen and Wayne Rooney, who had also come to footballing prominence as teenagers.

After more appearances for Leeds, Milner signed a five-year contract with them on 10 February 2003. At the start of the 2003–04 season, Milner was sent on a one-month loan to Second Division club Swindon Town to gain experience as a first-team player. Before the stint, he saw it as a valuable experience as a player. He spent a month with Swindon, playing in six matches and scoring two goals against Peterborough United and Luton Town.

However, Leeds' fortunes were on the decline; the team became the subject of numerous negative stories in the media, and several first-team players were sold. Milner said he believed that this experience made him emotionally stronger and taught him how to deal with team problems. Leeds's eventual relegation to the Championship led to speculation over Milner's future at the club. Tottenham Hotspur, Aston Villa and Everton all expressed an interest in signing him. Ultimately, Villa and Everton did not make offers and Milner rejected an offer from Tottenham as they were based too far from his family home, where he still lived. Leeds insisted that he would not be sold and the chairman of the club at the time even referred to him as "the future of Leeds". Nonetheless, financial problems eventually forced Leeds to sell Milner to Newcastle United for an initial price of £3.6 million. Although Milner was not happy to be leaving the club he had supported as a child, he wished to do what was "in the club's best interest" and in July 2004, he agreed a five-year contract with Newcastle.

Milner made his first appearance for Newcastle United during their pre-season tour of Asia, scoring his first goal for the club in a 1–1 draw against Kitchee, in Hong Kong. During this tour, he took the opportunity to observe how Newcastle striker Alan Shearer dealt with attention from fans and the media. He said that his association with people like Shearer gave him a better idea of how to deal with the media.

Milner's first Premier League match for Newcastle came against Middlesbrough on 18 August 2004, in which he played on the extreme right of the field as a winger, despite having featured regularly on the left for Leeds. When asked about this after the match, Milner said he had no preference where on the pitch he played. A month later he made his debut in European competition, when Newcastle played in the UEFA Cup against Bnei Sakhnin from Israel, after coming on as a substitute for Shola Ameobi. In the same month, he scored his first competitive goal for the club, also as a substitute, in a 3–1 win against West Bromwich Albion.

The situation changed for Milner after Newcastle manager Bobby Robson, whom Milner considered his mentor, was sacked and replaced by Graeme Souness. Under Souness, he started 13 league matches, but did not play his first full Premier League match for Newcastle until April 2005. Milner said that he was frustrated at not being used as a starter for most of the season.

At the start of the 2005–06 season, Milner scored in Newcastle's 3–1 away win against FK ZTS Dubnica in the UEFA Intertoto Cup, and also set up Alan Shearer for the team's third goal. A clause in Newcastle's purchase of Nolberto Solano from Aston Villa resulted in Milner being loaned to Villa for the rest of the season. Villa manager David O'Leary, who had managed Milner at Leeds, was happy to acquire Milner in this deal, saying that he believed Villa got the better of the deal and that he hoped to improve him as a player.

Milner made his Villa debut on 12 September 2005 in a Premier League match against West Ham United. Five days later, he scored his first goal for the club in a 1–1 draw against Tottenham Hotspur. In a League Cup match less than a week later, he helped his team recover from being 3–1 down at half-time to win 8–3 against Wycombe Wanderers, scoring two goals in the second half comeback. Throughout the season Milner was positive about his team. He remained confident that Villa would recover from a poor start to the season and praised the quality of the squad.

Milner was generally seen as a positive signing in a season that was disappointing for Villa. Milner himself also received the loan move positively, saying that he would like to join Villa permanently because of the probability of becoming a regular starter, but said that the possibility of this happening was beyond his control. Manager David O'Leary confirmed during the season that he would like Milner to join the club permanently, but doubted he would be given the opportunity to sign him. He even pulled out of signing Robert Huth so that he would have the funds to sign Milner permanently if the opportunity arose. Shortly before the end of his loan period, negotiations between Villa and Newcastle began.

The newly appointed Newcastle manager Glenn Roeder appeared to appreciate Milner's ability more than Souness and expressed a desire that he remain a Newcastle player. This, as well as the departure of O'Leary and the shortage of transfer funds at Villa, meant that a deal to sign Milner permanently seemed unlikely. In June, it became even less likely when Villa rejected an offer of Milner as part of a trade for Gareth Barry. However, the deal was resurrected when Villa were taken over by American billionaire Randy Lerner, and Martin O'Neill was appointed as new Villa manager. Villa made an improved offer on 30 August, which was accepted by Newcastle chairman Freddy Shepherd. Media sources quoted the transfer fee as being £4 million. A move to Villa appeared to have been agreed, but at the last moment Newcastle recalled Milner and the talks broke down.

Newcastle's players and manager Glenn Roeder reacted positively to Milner's return at the start of the 2006–07 season. Milner was a starter in the Newcastle team for the entire season.

Newcastle made a poor start in the 2006–07 Premier League, but in European competition, Milner played a key role in helping Newcastle advance through the group stage of the UEFA Cup. Shortly after, rumours began to spread that he would be sold during the transfer window in January, although both Milner and Roeder dismissed these rumours.

On 1 January 2007, Milner scored his first goal of the season in a 2–2 draw with Manchester United. The goal came from a "stunning" shot from away. He scored two more goals during the next three weeks, against Birmingham City and then against West Ham United. During the season, Milner displayed his ability to play comfortably in a range of different positions by scoring and setting up goals with both feet from both sides. As a result, Milner signed a new contract at Newcastle in January, which secured his future at the club until 2011. He signed another four-year contract in May 2007, when Sam Allardyce took over as manager of Newcastle. Milner said later in the year that he was happy about his future at the club and its new manager saying that the training sessions were "the best since I have been here". Allardyce said during the season that Milner was so keen to play, that he was concerned he would "burn out mentally [and] physically". As a result, Milner played mainly as a substitute in the early part of the season.

In late October, he scored Newcastle's 500th home Premier League goal in a 3–1 win over Tottenham Hotspur. A second Premier League goal of the season came fortuitously in the Tyne–Wear derby from a shot intended as a cross. Allardyce praised Milner highly during the season, saying he was "a hugely experienced Premier League player".

After missing the final nine matches of the season due to a foot injury, it was rumoured in May 2008 that he would be part of a transfer between Newcastle and Liverpool. Despite starting the season for Newcastle and scoring in a League Cup win over Coventry City, it was revealed after the match that Milner had handed in a written transfer request the week before.

Milner signed for Aston Villa on 29 August 2008 for a fee of £12 million, and signed a four-year contract with the club. Milner made his debut for Villa on 31 August 2008 as a second-half substitute against Liverpool. His first goals in his second spell at Villa came in a third round FA Cup tie against Gillingham at Priestfield Stadium on 4 January 2009 on his 23rd birthday, where he scored both goals in a 2–1 win for Villa.

Milner's first Premier League goal in his second spell at Villa came on 17 January 2009 in a 2–1 win against Sunderland at the Stadium of Light. On 7 February 2009, Milner was named to the England senior team squad for the first time, after a run at club level that had impressed England manager Fabio Capello. Milner continued to impress and scored his second league goal of the season against Blackburn Rovers on 7 February and scored a free kick from outside the penalty area at home against Everton as Villa came back from a 3–1 deficit to draw 3–3 on 12 April. He stated that his time at Villa is the "most settled" period of his career so far, having played for thirteen managers and caretakers despite being only 23.

At the start of the 2009–10 season, Milner moved into the centre of midfield after the sale of captain Gareth Barry to Manchester City. On 28 February 2010, he scored the opening goal in the 2010 League Cup Final with a penalty. Villa were eventually beaten 2–1 by Manchester United. Milner ended the season with 12 goals and was named Aston Villa's Fan's Player of the Year and PFA Young Player of the Year.

On 19 May 2010, Manchester City made a £20 million offer for Milner which was rejected. On 22 July 2010, Villa manager Martin O'Neill said that Milner had shown a desire to leave Villa for City, but would only be sold at Villa's valuation. On 14 August despite being on the verge of a move to Manchester City, Milner played in Villa's first match of the season against West Ham United, scoring Villa's third goal. Milner was given a standing ovation when he was substituted near the end of the match.

On 17 August 2010, it was reported that Aston Villa had agreed a deal with Manchester City to sell Milner subject to a medical. The deal was reported to be worth around £26 million, including a player exchange of Stephen Ireland. Milner made his debut for City on 23 August 2010 in a 3–0 home win against Liverpool, where he set up the first goal for former Villa teammate Gareth Barry. Milner scored his first competitive goal for Manchester City in an FA Cup third-round match at Leicester City which ended in a 2–2 draw. The Leicester match was the start of a cup run that saw Manchester City reach the 2011 FA Cup Final. Milner was an unused substitute as Manchester City beat Stoke City 1–0 to win the FA Cup.

Milner scored his first Premier League goal for Manchester City against Everton on 24 September 2011. Two matches later, he scored his second, against former club Aston Villa in a 4–1 win. The following week, Milner had a hand in two goals as Manchester City won the Manchester derby at Old Trafford 6–1, inflicting Manchester United's heaviest home league defeat since 1930. Over the course of the 2011–12 season, Milner made 26 Premier League appearances as Manchester City won the league title for the first time in 44 years.

On 6 October 2012, Milner scored his first goal of the 2012–13 season from a free kick to seal a 3–0 win against Sunderland. On 20 October, he received his first Premier League red card in a 2–1 win at West Bromwich Albion. On 13 January 2013, he scored City's opening goal in a 2–0 away win at Arsenal, which was the first time a City player had scored away at Arsenal in the League since 2007 and City's first win in the league at Arsenal since 1975. On 8 April, he scored in the Manchester derby as City beat Manchester United 2–1 at Old Trafford.

On 10 December 2013, Milner scored the winning goal in a 3–2 win against the reigning European champions Bayern Munich at the Allianz Arena in the UEFA Champions League, becoming the first English player to score for Manchester City in the competition that season.

On 4 June 2015, Milner agreed to join Liverpool on a free transfer from Manchester City. On 7 August 2015, Milner was announced as the vice captain. Milner played his first competitive match for the club in 1–0 win over Stoke City at the Britannia Stadium. Milner captained Liverpool for the first time on his third appearance for the club, a 0–0 draw at Arsenal. On 26 September 2015, he scored his debut goal for Liverpool in a 3–2 win against his former club Aston Villa at Anfield. He appeared in the 2016 UEFA Europa League Final at the end of his first season with the club. Milner ended his first season with Liverpool scoring seven goals in all competitions.

On 19 March 2017, Milner scored in Liverpool's 1–1 draw against former club Man City. In doing so, he broke a Premier League record by a player for the most matches scored in without losing (47 matches). On 4 April 2018, he equalled the Champions league assist record (8 assists) by assisting Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain's goal against Man City in the quarter-final first leg. On 24 April 2018, Milner broke that record, becoming the first player in Champions League history to provide 9 assists in a single season, setting up Roberto Firmino's second goal during the 5–2 semi-final, first leg win vs Roma.

In November 2018, Milner scored his 50th Premier League goal during a 1-1 draw at Arsenal. The following month, Milner became just the 13th player (and the 2nd youngest after former Aston Villa, Man City and England teammate Gareth Barry) in Premier League history to reach 500 appearances, during a 4-0 win at Bournemouth.

After representing England at the under-15 and under-17 levels, Milner was promoted to the under-20 level and called up for the 2003 World Youth Championship. Soon after this, under-21 manager Peter Taylor called him up to the England under-21 team and Milner made his debut against Sweden on 30 March 2004.

Milner scored his first goal for the England under-21 team during the 2004–05 season in a qualification match for the 2007 UEFA European Under-21 Championship, against Wales. During the match, in which he played in the centre of midfield, he also set up a scoring chance for Darren Bent as the Young Lions won 2–0. Despite domestic club troubles, he continued to make progress at international level, scoring the winning goal for the England under-21 team in a 3–2 win over Switzerland. The win secured England a place in the playoff stage of the 2007 UEFA European Under-21 Championship qualifiers.

In June, Milner competed for England at the 2007 UEFA European Under-21 Championship. He played in all four of England's matches and was booked in the semi-final against the Netherlands, which meant he would have missed the final. The match was decided by a penalty shoot-out, in which Milner scored twice and England lost 13–12. Milner was included in the under-21 squad for a friendly against Romania, which ended in a 1–1 draw. A month later, Milner set an England under-21 record by making his 30th appearance for the team in a 3–0 win against Montenegro. Historically, players with several England Under-21 appearances have not progressed to become regulars in the senior team, which has led some to doubt whether Milner would be able to successfully make the transition. In October, he scored his third goal for the under-21 team in a 3–0 win over Republic of Ireland. He scored again in the return match four months later that England also won 3–0.

Milner continued to be a regular and was the only player, along with Joe Hart and captain Steven Taylor, to have played in all the qualifiers for the 2009 UEFA European Under-21 Championship. In the summer of 2009, he was in the final 23-man U21 squad for the 2009 UEFA European Under-21 Championship in Sweden. He helped set up the winning goal for Micah Richards against Finland, and manager Stuart Pearce said after the match, "The modern-day full-back can get up and down the pitch and I knew [Milner] would be comfortable". In England's second match against Spain, Milner had a penalty well saved by Sergio Asenjo, and scored England's second goal in a 2–0 win. England faced the hosts Sweden in the semi-finals. After the match ended in a 3–3 draw, it went to a penalty shoot-out. Milner was the only England player to miss in the shoot-out after he slipped just before kicking the ball, causing it to sail over the crossbar. England won the shoot-out 5–4 to advance to the final for the first time in 25 years. England lost the final to Germany 4–0 and Milner said after the match that the team was "hurting" and that the way in which the team lost was "not good enough". The final was his last match for the under-21 team. His 46 appearances at under-21 level are a national record.

In August 2009, Milner made his debut for the England senior team, when he came on as a substitute in a friendly match against the Netherlands for the final 23 minutes. The match ended in a 2–2 draw. He played twice more for England the following month against Slovenia in another friendly and made his competitive debut four days later in a 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifier against Croatia, where he played the final nine minutes. England won the latter match 5–1 to secure qualification for the 2010 FIFA World Cup. He was named in the final 23-man squad for the World Cup finals in South Africa and was selected in the starting eleven for England's first match of the tournament against the United States, however he was substituted after 30 minutes. In England's third match against Slovenia, he set up the only goal of the match with a cross for Jermain Defoe. He captained England for the first time for the final 10 minutes of the match in a 2–1 loss against France on 17 November 2010, when both Rio Ferdinand and Steven Gerrard had been substituted.

Milner played in six matches during qualifying for UEFA Euro 2012, and was named in Roy Hodgson's 23-man squad for the tournament. Milner started Hodgson's first match in charge, a 1–0 friendly win against Norway.

On 7 September 2012, Milner scored his first international goal in a 5–0 win away to Moldova during 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifying.

On 5 August 2016, Milner announced his retirement from international duty following discussions with new England manager Sam Allardyce.

Milner is regarded as being a tenacious footballer. As a result, his main role on the team is as a wide midfielder who creates scoring opportunities, as well as taking the ball past defenders. While Milner does not score many goals, he does have a good record at providing assists. Nolberto Solano, a former teammate, said that because of his ability, Milner would "become an important team player". After his move to Newcastle, he began playing more as a winger. He has been described as "comfortable on either wing". He has also been used occasionally as a central midfielder, a striker and as an emergency right-back, generally during an injury crisis. Manuel Pellegrini, who managed Milner at Manchester City, described Milner as the most complete English player in the modern game praising his all round ability, commitment, performance level and versatility.

Milner has the ability to pass accurately and shoot from a great distance from goal. As a result, he usually goes forward for set pieces and is often a candidate to take corners and free kicks. Critical opinion is divided as to Milner's crossing ability. While some commentators have been critical of his ability in this area, other journalists have said that Milner can produce accurate crosses.
Milner, in his time at the club, was described on the Newcastle United official website as "a good reader of the game". This awareness allows him to pass the ball from a range of positions to teammates making forward runs, as well as giving him the confidence to take on defenders. His awareness and willingness to pass have been called mature for a player of his age.

Milner played in a number of different positions for Aston Villa, including both wings, in central midfield and even as a right back. Under Jürgen Klopp, Milner spent all of the 2016–17 season playing at left-back for Liverpool. Milner stated he did not enjoy playing as a left-back but also said: "It's about whatever's best for the team and ultimately I just want to be out there playing games, contributing and helping this football club."

Aston Villa

Manchester City

Liverpool

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="43414384" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43414384" title="Naby Keïta">
Naby Keïta

Naby Laye Keïta (born 10 February 1995) is a Guinean professional footballer who plays as a central midfielder for Premier League club Liverpool and captains the Guinea national team.

Keïta began his professional career with Ligue 2 club FC Istres in 2013, and a year later he moved to Red Bull Salzburg, where he won the Austrian Football Bundesliga and Austrian Cup double in both of his seasons. He then moved to RB Leipzig in 2016, making the Bundesliga team of the season in his first year and the UEFA Europa League squad of the season in his second.

Keïta made his senior international debut for Guinea in 2013. He has earned over 30 caps and was part of their squad at the 2015 Africa Cup of Nations.

Keïta joined hometown club Horoya AC aged nine. He moved to France in 2012, joining the youth team of FC Istres after unsuccessful trials at FC Lorient and Le Mans FC.

In 2013, he was promoted to the first team of Istres. He made his Ligue 2 debut on 22 November 2013 against Nîmes Olympique. He scored 11 goals in 23 games in his first season as a professional, while his team were relegated to the Championnat National.

In 2014, he joined Austrian top division side Red Bull Salzburg. He made his league debut on 26 July 2014 against Wiener Neustadt. Keïta ended the season with five goals and two assists in 30 games, winning the league and cup double. The following season, he was selected as the Austrian Bundesliga Player of the Year.

In June 2016, Keïta moved to Red Bull Salzburg sister-club RB Leipzig, who had just been promoted to the German Bundesliga. He scored the winner on his league debut against Borussia Dortmund and scored seven more goals in his debut Bundesliga season. He was named in the league's team of the season.

Keïta was named in the squad of the season for the 2017–18 UEFA Europa League, in which his team were quarter-finalists.

On 28 August 2017, a deal was struck for Keïta to join Liverpool on 1 July 2018 after the English club triggered his £48 million release clause in addition to paying an undisclosed premium. There would be no premium (£48 million total) if Leipzig did not qualify for European football, £4.75 million (£52.75 million total) if they qualified for the Europa League and £11 million (£59 million total) if they finished in the Champions League spots. Leipzig finished 6th in the Bundesliga, qualifying for the Europa League.

Upon joining Liverpool he was handed the number 8 shirt by Liverpool legend Steven Gerrard which had been vacated upon the departure of Gerrard to LA Galaxy in 2015. Keïta made his debut for Liverpool against West Ham United on 12 August 2018 and played a part in the opening goal for Mohamed Salah in a 4–0 win.

On 28 July 2013, Keïta made his international debut for the Guinea national team against Mali in a 2014 African Nations Championship qualification match. He came on as a half-time substitute for Naby Laye Camara in the 1–0 home win.

He was included in Michel Dussuyer's 23-man squad for the 2015 Africa Cup of Nations in Equatorial Guinea. In the opening match against the Ivory Coast, he was struck in the face by Gervinho, who was sent off.

On 12 November 2015, he scored his first international goal, the only one away to Namibia in the first leg of the second round of 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification. Three days later in the return leg – in Morocco due to the Ebola virus epidemic in Guinea – he scored again in a 2–0 win.

In autumn 2017, Keïta was charged with uttering false documents. The German newspaper "Bild" reported that, in early December 2016 and again six weeks later, he had presented two fake Guinean driver's licences in order to obtain a driving licence in Germany. The district court in Leipzig "(Amtsgericht Leipzig)" fined him €415,000 to be paid in 50 daily instalments of €8,300, basing the sentence on Keïta's net annual income of around €3 million. Keïta's lawyer filed an appeal against the sentence which was to come on before the same court in 2018.

Keita has been described as a dynamic, box-to-box central midfielder. He is able to distribute the ball with range and accuracy, score goals frequently and has been compared to N'Golo Kanté and Deco.

Red Bull Salzburg

Individual


</doc>
<doc id="32445431" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32445431" title="Roberto Firmino">
Roberto Firmino

Roberto Firmino Barbosa de Oliveira (born 2 October 1991) is a Brazilian professional footballer who plays for club Liverpool and the Brazil national team as an attacking midfielder, forward or winger.

After starting his career with Figueirense in 2009, he spent four-and-a-half seasons at Hoffenheim. His 16 goals in 33 games for the 2013–14 Bundesliga season earned him the award for the league's Breakthrough Player. In July 2015, he signed for Premier League club Liverpool. His creativity, goalscoring and work rate have earned him plaudits at Liverpool, with manager Jürgen Klopp referring to Firmino as the "engine" that propels the club’s counter-attacking system.

Firmino made his international debut for Brazil in November 2014 and represented the nation at the 2015 Copa América and the 2018 FIFA World Cup.

Born in Maceió, Alagoas, Firmino joined Figueirense's youth setup in 2008, aged 17, after starting out at CRB. He was discovered by a dentist, Marcellus Portella. With the latter, he was mainly used as a defensive midfielder.

Firmino made his professional debut on 24 October 2009, coming on as a half-time substitute for Toninho in a 1–2 home loss against Ponte Preta, for the Série B championship. In January 2010 he was promoted to the main squad.

Firmino scored his first professional goal on 8 May 2010, netting the winner in an away success against São Caetano. He contributed with eight goals in 36 appearances during the season, as "Figueira" returned to Série A after a two-year absence.

Firmino signed with Hoffenheim in December 2010, with the contract running until June 2015. He formally arrived at Hoffenheim on 1 January 2011. Then Hoffenheim manager Ernst Tanner commented that they were "pleased to hire a Brazilian talent". He made his debut a month later in a Bundesliga defeat against Mainz, where he came on as a 75th-minute substitute for Sebastian Rudy. He scored his first goal for the club on 16 April, the only goal of a league victory against Eintracht Frankfurt.

He was dropped from the first-team squad along with Chinedu Obasi at the end of November 2011 for showing up late for training, missing the league match against Bayer Leverkusen. He scored two more goals that season, against Wolfsburg and Borussia Mönchengladbach. In the 2012–13 season, Firmino made 36 appearances and scored seven goals.

In July 2013, Russian club Lokomotiv Moscow made a €12 million bid for Firmino. Hoffenheim captain Andreas Beck hailed Firmino's development as "outstanding" in August 2013. On 27 March 2014, Firmino extended his contract with the club, signing a three-year extension. He finished the 2013–14 Bundesliga season tied as the fourth highest scorer with 16 goals, and was named the league's Breakthrough Player.

On 23 June 2015, while he was competing for Brazil at the Copa América, Hoffenheim and Firmino agreed terms for him to transfer to Premier League club Liverpool for up to £29 million on conclusion of the tournament, subject to a work permit. Liverpool confirmed the signing the following day, subject to a medical. The deal was finalised on 4 July.

Firmino made his Liverpool debut in a pre-season friendly away to Swindon Town on 2 August, and his league debut a week later, replacing Jordon Ibe for the final 12 minutes of a 1–0 win at Stoke City. On 21 November, Firmino scored his first goal for Liverpool in a 4–1 victory over Manchester City at the City of Manchester Stadium. In January 2016, Firmino was described by Paul Little of the "Irish Examiner" as steadily improving during his first season in England, although an inability to combine with centre forward Christian Benteke drew criticism.

However, in 2016, Firmino's form improved as manager Jürgen Klopp played him alone up front in a False 9 role. He scored braces against Arsenal and Norwich City that month; the latter performance, in which he also assisted in a 5–4 win, earned comparisons to Raheem Sterling. With his form improved, Firmino was voted to be Liverpool's Player of the Month in January. Firmino ended the season as Liverpool's league top scorer with ten goals.

On 23 August, Firmino scored his first goal of the 2016–17 season, scoring in a 5–0 win over Burton Albion in the second round of the EFL Cup. Firmino scored his first league goals of the season in a 4–1 win over Leicester City, scoring a brace, on 10 September. On 29 October, Firmino scored in a 4–2 win over Crystal Palace, and on 6 November he scored in a 6–1 over Watford; the latter result saw Liverpool move to 1st position in the league table, the first time under Klopp. On 27 December, he scored in a 4–1 win over Stoke City. On 21 January 2017, Firmino scored a brace in a 2–3 home defeat to Swansea City. On 4 March, he scored the opening goal in a 3–1 win over Arsenal. On 8 April, Firmino scored the winning goal in a 2–1 win over Stoke City, and also scored the winning goal in the game against West Bromwich Albion, which Liverpool won 1–0, on 16 April. Firmino finished the season with 12 goals in 38 appearances.

Before the start of the 2017–18 season, Firmino switched his shirt number to 9, with new signing Mohamed Salah taking his number 11. Firmino scored his first goal of the new season on 12 August, scoring a penalty in a 3–3 draw with Watford. On 23 August, Firmino scored in a 4–2 win over Hoffenheim in the second leg of the UEFA Champions League play-off, with Liverpool winning 6–3 on aggregate to qualify for the 2017–18 UEFA Champions League group stage. On 27 August, he scored the opening goal in a 4–0 win over Arsenal. On 13 September, Firmino scored and missed a penalty in a 2–2 draw with Sevilla in the first match of the Champions League. On 17 October, Firmino scored twice in a 7–0 Champions League away win over Maribor, helping Liverpool to the joint-largest away win of the competition; and the largest away win by an English club. 

On 28 October, Firmino scored in a 3–0 win over Huddersfield Town. On 21 November, he scored twice in a 3–3 draw with Sevilla in the Champions League. On 2 December, Firmino scored twice in a 5–1 away win over Brighton & Hove Albion. On 6 December, he scored in a 7–0 win over Spartak Moscow in the Champions League. On 17 December, he scored in a 4–0 away win over Bournemouth; a result which saw Liverpool become the first team in Premier League history to win four consecutive away games by a margin of at least three goals. On 22 December, Firmino scored the equalizing goal in a 3–3 away draw with Arsenal. On 26 December, Firmino scored twice in a 5–0 win over Swansea City.

On 5 January 2018, during a FA Cup match against rivals Everton, Firmino was the subject of controversy following a clash with Everton defender Mason Holgate. Holgate pushed Firmino into the advertising boards, which was followed by the pair exchanging words, with Firmino seemingly insulting the player. Following the match, Holgate accused Firmino of racially abusing him, which he denied. A day later, the Football Association opened an investigation on the matter. Nearly two months later, after they had took statements from 12 different players, several referees and consulted two Portuguese lip-readers, the Football Association cleared Firmino of any offence as a result of "insufficient evidence".

On 14 January, Firmino scored in a 4–3 home win over Manchester City; which saw Liverpool end City's unbeaten league run. On 27 January, Firmino scored and missed a penalty in a 2–3 defeat to West Bromwich Albion in the fourth round of the FA Cup. On 30 January, he scored in a 3–0 away win over Huddersfield Town. On 11 February 2018, Firmino scored in a 2–0 away win over Southampton. On 14 February, Firmino scored in a 5–0 away win over Porto in the first leg of the Champions League round of sixteen. On 24 February, he scored in a 4–1 win over West Ham United. On 17 March, he scored in 5–0 win over Watford. On 10 April, he scored in a 2–1 win over Manchester City in the second leg of the quarter-finals of the Champions League; which saw Liverpool advance to the semi-finals with a 5–1 aggregate win. Four days later, on 14 April, he scored in a 3–0 win over Bournemouth. On 24 April, he scored twice in Liverpool's 5–2 win over Roma in the first leg of the Champions League semi-finals. On 29 April, Firmino signed a new long-term contract with Liverpool. Firmino started and played the whole 90 minutes in the 2018 UEFA Champions League Final, with Liverpool losing 3–1.

During the season, Firmino, Mohamed Salah, Philippe Coutinho and Sadio Mané made up a prolific attacking quarter, dubbed the "Fab Four", in reference to the rock band The Beatles, also from the same city as the club. Following the mid-season exit of Coutinho, the three remaining players were dubbed as the "Fab Three", with the trio having a total of 91 goals between them at the end of the season. Firmino was Liverpool's joint top goalscorer in the UEFA Champions League, together with Salah, with 11 goals. Firmino was also included in the 2017–18 UEFA Champions League Squad of the Season. The 2017–18 season was Firmino's most prolific in his Liverpool career; as he scored 27 goals in all competitions.

After going goalless in all three matches played in August, Firmino scored his first goal of the season in a 2–1 Premier League win over Leicester City on 1 September. On 15 September he scored in Liverpool’s 2–1 league win over Spurs at Wembley, a game that saw him leave the field 15 minutes before the end with an eye injury. Three days later he came off the bench to score the stoppage time winner in Liverpool’s 3–2 Champions League win against Paris Saint-Germain at Anfield. On 29 December, Firmino scored his first Liverpool hat-trick in a 5–1 win over Arsenal, scoring two goals in three minutes and a second half penalty, becoming the highest scoring Brazilian player in Premier League history. On 19 January 2019, he scored Liverpool's 1000th goal at Anfield in the Premier League era when he netted in a 4–3 win over Crystal Palace.

Firmino said that it was his "dream" to play in the national team though he had no "contact with national team manager Dunga". On 23 October 2014, Firmino received his first call up to Brazil national football team for the friendly matches against Turkey and Austria. He commented, "I'm very happy about the nomination and would especially like to thank the team". He debuted in a 4–0 win over Turkey on 12 November, replacing fellow debutant Luiz Adriano for the last 17 minutes. Firmino scored his first goal six days later in the latter match, a 2–1 away win.

In May 2015, Firmino was included in Brazil's 23-man squad for the 2015 Copa América to be held in Chile. On 21 June, he scored in a 2–1 defeat of Venezuela to qualify the "Seleção" for the knockout stage as Group C winners.

In May 2018 he was named in Tite's final 23 man squad for the 2018 World Cup in Russia. On 2 July, Firmino scored Brazil's second goal in a 2–0 win over Mexico in the round of sixteen having come on as a late substitute.

At Hoffenheim, Firmino primarily played as an attacking midfielder, but was also utilised as a forward, winger or central midfielder, with Firmino using his speed, close control and vision wherever he is deployed. After initially starting as a left winger at Liverpool under Brendan Rodgers, new manager Jürgen Klopp utilised Firmino more centrally, initially as a False 9. However, after impressing under Klopp's pressing system, Firmino established himself as Liverpool's first choice centre-forward by the 2017–18 season. Ian Doyle of the "Liverpool Echo" referred to him as "a true Liverpool number nine", whose "numbers are up there with Harry Kane and Sergio Agüero." 

Ryan Babel, a teammate of Firmino's at Hoffenheim, described him as "A tricky player. He can dribble, shoot, he has a great shot, he can play a lot of through balls and his assists are very good", while also praising a heading ability which would not be common amongst other players of Firmino's stature. Babel also stated that Firmino had a humble mentality and no problems with attitude. In addition to his technical skills, creativity, link-up play, and goalscoring, Firmino has also been praised by his managers, teammates, and pundits for his positional sense, intelligent movement, and ability to make attacking runs off the ball, which often draws opposing players out of position and creates space for his teammates.

Due to his energy and defensive work-rate off the ball, Klopp has referred to Firmino as the "engine" that propels the team's relentless counter-attacking system; "If he loses the ball, he fights for it back. If he loses it again, he fights for it. He looks like the engine of the team." The suitability of Firmino's playing style to Klopp's pressing system has meant that Firmino was referred to as "Liverpool's most important player" on several occasions during the 2016–17 and 2017–18 seasons.

Firmino is also well-known for his popular "no-look" goals. One of his best known goal celebrations, 'the Matador', features in the "FIFA" video game "FIFA 19".

Firmino married Larissa Pereira in his hometown in June 2017. They have two daughters. Firmino has been given the affectionate nickname "Bobby" by Liverpool fans and players – a shortening of his first name "Roberto".

In December 2016, Firmino was arrested for drink driving. He was fined £20,000 and had his driving licence revoked for a year when sentenced at Liverpool Magistrates' Court in February 2017.

Liverpool

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="34758489" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34758489" title="Sadio Mané">
Sadio Mané

Sadio Mané (born 10 April 1992) is a Senegalese professional footballer who plays as a winger for club Liverpool and the Senegal national team.

Having begun his career with Metz in France, he transferred to Red Bull Salzburg in 2012. After winning the Austrian Bundesliga and Austrian Cup in 2014, he was signed by Southampton. In 2015, Mané set a new Premier League record for the fastest hat-trick when he scored three times in 176 seconds during a 6–1 win over Aston Villa. He transferred to Liverpool in 2016 for a fee of £34 million, making him the most expensive African player in history at that time. Since joining Liverpool, Mané among other achievements scored in the 2018 UEFA Champions League Final.

Mané has earned over 50 caps for Senegal since his debut in 2012, and represented the national team at the 2012 Olympics, 2015 Africa Cup of Nations, 2017 Africa Cup of Nations and the 2018 FIFA World Cup.

Born in Sédhiou, Sénégal, Mané started his career at the Académie Génération Foot, Senegalese football academy.

Mané made his professional debut for Metz on 14 January 2012, coming on as a substitute for Kévin Diaz in the 75th minute of a 0–1 home defeat against Bastia in Ligue 2. He made 19 appearances in his first league season, 12 as a starter, and scored a solitary goal in a 2–5 loss to Guingamp at the Stade Saint-Symphorien on 4 May. Metz were relegated to the Championnat National at the end of the season.

On 31 August 2012, Mané moved to Austrian Bundesliga side Red Bull Salzburg for the third biggest transfer fee that FC Metz had ever received. The fee was believed to be €4 million.

He scored his first hat-trick for the club on 31 October, in a 3–1 away win at Kalsdorf in the third round of the Austrian Cup.

On 27 October 2013, he netted his first hat-trick in the Austrian Bundesliga, during a 3–0 win away to Grödig. He scored another treble on 7 May 2014 as Salzburg won 7–0 at Horn in the cup semi-finals; the season ended with the team winning a domestic double. At the end of August 2014 Mané forced a transfer out of the club, by not coming to the training and to the most important game for Salzburg at that time to qualify for the Champions League.

On 1 September 2014, Mané transferred to Premier League side Southampton for £11.8 million, signing a four-year contract. He made his debut 22 days later in a 2–1 League Cup victory over Arsenal, winning the penalty for Southampton's first goal. He made his first league appearance for the club in another 2–1 victory over Queens Park Rangers on 27 September, starting and assisting Ryan Bertrand for the first goal of the game. He scored his first goal for the club in an 8–0 victory over Sunderland on 18 October, although this was subsequently credited as an own goal by Patrick van Aanholt. He did, however, score his first goal in his next game, a 1–0 win over Stoke City a week later.

In December and January he scored in three successive matches, against Crystal Palace, Chelsea and Arsenal. Mané scored two late winning goals in 1–0 league victories at Queens Park Rangers on 7 February 2015 and at home to Crystal Palace on 3 March respectively. However, Mané had been dropped from Southampton's starting line-up for their 0–2 home defeat to Liverpool on 22 February as a punishment for being late to the stadium.

On 16 May, during Southampton's final home match of the season, Mané scored three times in 2 minutes 56 seconds in a 6–1 win over Aston Villa to set a new Premier League record for the fastest hat-trick. The record had been held since 1994 by Robbie Fowler, who scored three against Arsenal in 4 minutes and 33 seconds. Mané finished the season with 10 goals from 32 appearances in all competitions.

Mané began the 2015–16 season by registering two assists in the UEFA Europa League third qualifying round first leg match with Vitesse Arnhem at home and scoring in the return leg, as Southampton eased through to the next round 5–0 on aggregate. On 2 December, he took 39 seconds to open the scoring against Liverpool in the quarter-finals of the League Cup, but the Saints eventually lost 6–1 at home.

On 2 January 2016, he was again dropped from the starting line-up by manager Ronald Koeman for a match at Norwich City when he turned up late for a pre-match meeting. He received a straight red card on 12 March at the end of a 2–1 win at Stoke City for a collision into Erik Pieters, although this was quickly overturned on appeal.

Having failed to score in the league for over four months, Mané scored twice in a 3–2 victory over Liverpool on 20 March 2016, followed by five goals in the next five matches, including a hat-trick in a 4–2 victory against Manchester City on 1 May. He finished the season as Southampton's top scorer, with 15 goals in all competitions.

On 28 June 2016, Mané joined Liverpool for a transfer fee of £34 million on a five-year contract. The transfer fee made him the most expensive African player in history at the time. On 14 August, he made his Premier League debut for the Reds, scoring the fourth goal in a 4–3 away win against Arsenal. Having missed Liverpool's defeat at Burnley through a slight shoulder injury, Mane returned to the starting line-up against Burton Albion in the League Cup where he had two assists in a 5–0 win.

On 19 December, Mané scored the only goal of the 227th Merseyside derby in added time against Everton at Goodison Park.
On 11 February 2017, Mané scored two goals within two minutes against Tottenham Hotspur at Anfield, for Liverpool's first league win in 2017. On 20 April 2017, Mané was named in the PFA Team of the Year after scoring 13 league goals in his first season with Liverpool. Despite missing the latter part of the campaign through injury, Mané was awarded the Liverpool Player of the Season award on 9 May 2017.

In the first match of the new season, on 12 August 2017, away to Watford, Mané scored Liverpool's first goal of the season in a 3–3 draw. He was named Premier League Player of the Month after scoring a goal in each of the Reds' three matches in August. On 9 September 2017, he was given a straight red card in the first half of a 5–0 loss to Manchester City for a high boot against goalkeeper Ederson, resulting in a three-match ban. Mané, Mohamed Salah, Roberto Firmino and Philippe Coutinho made up a prolific attacking quartet dubbed the "Fab Four" and "Fab Three" after the mid-season exit of the latter.

On 14 February 2018, Mané scored his first hat-trick for Liverpool in a 5–0 away win against Porto in the round of 16 first leg of the 2017–18 UEFA Champions League. In doing so, he became only the second player to score an away hat-trick for the club in Europe. Later, with a goal in the 3–0 win over AFC Bournemouth on 14 April, he overtook Demba Ba's record of 43 to become the highest scoring Senegalese in Premier League history.

On 26 May, during the 2018 UEFA Champions League Final against Real Madrid, Mané scored Liverpool's equalizing goal in a 3–1 defeat. In doing so, he became the first Senegalese player to score in the final of the competition. His goal was also his 10th for the campaign which saw Liverpool become the first team in history to have three players score 10+ goals in a single Champions League season, with Mané achieving the milestone alongside fellow forwards Salah and Firmino.

On 22 November 2018, Mané signed new long-term deal with The Reds.

On 10 March 2019, Mané scored twice in a 4–2 win over Burnley, the second of which was his 50th competitive goal for Liverpool. His goals also saw him become only the fifth Liverpool player to score in six consecutive home Premier League appearances after Michael Owen, Fernando Torres, Luis Suárez and Salah. Three days later, he scored twice more in a 3–1 win over Bayern Munich to help Liverpool progress to the quarter-finals of the Champions League. In doing so, he became the club's record goalscorer away from home in the competition with seven goals to his name.

Mané was part of the Senegal team at the 2012 Olympic tournament, and started every match as they advanced through Group A as runners-up to Great Britain before losing 4–2 after extra time in the quarter-finals to eventual champions Mexico.

Mané was ruled out of the Senegalese squad for the 2015 Africa Cup of Nations after suffering a calf injury in Southampton's 2–0 win against Arsenal on 1 January 2015. He later returned to the squad, and started in their final two group matches against South Africa and Algeria in a group stage exit.

Mané represented Senegal at the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations in Gabon and scored a goal in each of the nation's opening two games, 2–0 wins against Tunisia and Zimbabwe. After a goalless draw in the quarter-final clash against Cameroon, he missed in the penalty shootout as Senegal were eliminated.

In May 2018, he was named in Senegal's 23-man squad for the 2018 FIFA World Cup in Russia. He scored the opening goal in a 2–2 draw against Japan in the group stage.

Mané is a practising Muslim and often makes du'a before the start of each match. He pursued a career in football despite his father forbidding him from playing the sport as a child. He currently resides in Allerton and has been burgled twice, once in November 2017 and again in February 2019.

Red Bull Salzburg

Liverpool

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="35440786" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35440786" title="Mohamed Salah">
Mohamed Salah

Mohamed Salah Hamed Mahrous Ghaly ( , ; born 15 June 1992) is an Egyptian professional footballer who plays as a forward for club Liverpool and the Egypt national team. He is considered Europe's top five leagues' fifth most expensive player from a transfer value perspective by the CIES.

Salah started his senior career with Cairo club El Mokawloon in the Egyptian Premier League in 2010, departing shortly thereafter to join Basel for an undisclosed fee. In Switzerland, he starred as he won the league title in his debut season, winning the SAFP Golden Player Award in the process. Salah's performances then attracted Premier League side Chelsea, and he joined the club for a £11 million fee in 2014. However, he was used sparingly in his debut season and was allowed to leave on loan to Serie A clubs Fiorentina and Roma, with the latter eventually signing him permanently for €15 million.

Following consistent match-winning performances in Rome to lead them to second-placed finish and a record points-tally in 2017, Salah relocated back to the Premier League to sign for Liverpool for a then club-record fee of £36.9 million. During his second spell in England, Salah adapted his game from a natural winger to a complete forward and quickly became the focal point of the team. He would go on to break the club's scoring record for a debut season, receiving the Premier League Golden Boot after registering a record 32 goals in 36 league games. He also became the first player to win three Premier League Player of the Month awards in the same season. His record-breaking performances saw him receive a number of other accolades at the end of the season, including the PFA Players' Player of the Year, the Football Writers' Player of the Year and the PFA Fans' Player of the Year awards. Salah also came third in the award for the 2018 Best FIFA Men's Player.

At international level, Salah represented Egypt at youth level, winning a bronze medal in the Africa U-20 Cup of Nations, and participated in the 2011 FIFA U-20 World Cup and the 2012 Summer Olympics. He was awarded the CAF Most Promising African Talent of the Year in 2012. Making his debut with the senior national team in 2011, he helped Egypt reach the final of the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations, and he became the top scorer during CAF qualification to help the team qualify for the 2018 FIFA World Cup. For his performances, Salah was named CAF African Footballer of the Year twice and the BBC African Footballer of the Year. He was also selected in the CAF Team of the Year and Africa Cup of Nations Team of the Tournament.

Salah played his youth football with El Mokawloon. He made his senior team debut in the Egyptian Premier League coming on as a substitute on 3 May 2010 in a 1–1 away draw against El Mansoura. During the 2010–11 season Salah continued earning minutes on the pitch, eventually becoming a regular in the team. He scored his first goal for them on 25 December 2010 in a 1–1 away draw against Al Ahly. He remained a regular for Al Mokawloon, appearing in every game of the 2011–12 season. Following the Port Said Stadium riot on 1 February 2012, the Egyptian Premier League was suspended, and on 10 March 2012, the Egyptian Football Association announced their decision to cancel the remainder of the season.

Swiss Super League club Basel had been monitoring Salah for some time, so following the Egyptian Premier League suspension, the club organised a friendly match with the Egypt U-23 team. The match took place on 16 March at the Stadion Rankhof in Basel, and despite only playing the second half, Salah scored twice, helping the Egyptians to a 4–3 win. Basel subsequently invited Salah to remain in the city for a week's training. On 10 April 2012, it was announced that Salah had signed for Basel on a four-year contract starting from 15 June 2012.

Salah scored on his unofficial debut on 23 June 2012 against Steaua București during a friendly match, a 4–2 defeat. He made his official Basel debut in a UEFA Champions League preliminary stage match against the Norwegian club Molde on 8 August, coming on as a substitute in the 74th minute. He made his league debut on 12 August against Thun, playing the full match. He scored his first league goal a week later, the second goal in the 2–0 home win against Lausanne. Salah scored his first Europa League goal in the quarter-finals on 11 April 2013, as Basel advanced to the semi-finals by beating Tottenham Hotspur 4–1 on penalties after a 4–4 aggregate draw. In the semi-final on 2 May, Salah scored against Chelsea at Stamford Bridge, although they were beaten 2–5 on aggregate. Despite late disappointment in Europe, Basel comfortably won the Swiss Super League season 2012–13 Championship title and finished runners-up in the Swiss Cup.

To the start of the 2013–14 Swiss Super League season Salah was member of the Basel team that won the 2013 Uhrencup. Salah scored on his first league appearance against Aarau on 13 July 2013. He scored his first Champions League goal a month later against Maccabi Tel Aviv on 6 August 2013 in the third qualifying round. Before the first leg on 30 July 2013, Salah did not take part in the UEFA-mandated pre-match handshakes with Maccabi players. Basel called the incident a "coincidence" and said it was not intended as a snub. Salah was on pressure from several Egyptian voices demanding from him not to travel to Israel and then criticizing his visit. On the return leg in Tel Aviv, he took part in the handshake line, but offered fist bumps rather than an open hand to Maccabi players. He scored twice against the Bulgarian league champions PFC Ludogorets Razgrad on 21 August 2013 in the play-off round. On 18 September 2013, Salah scored the equalizer against Chelsea in the 2–1 away win during the group stage. During the return tie on 26 November at the St. Jakob-Park, Salah scored the winning goal as Basel beat Chelsea for the second time with a 1–0 home win.

On 23 January 2014, Chelsea announced that a deal had been agreed with Basel to bring Salah to London for a fee reported to be in the region of £11 million. Three days later the transfer was completed, making him the first Egyptian to sign for the Stamford Bridge club.

On 8 February, Salah made his debut for Chelsea in the Premier League, coming on as a substitute in the 3–0 win over Newcastle United. On 22 March, Salah scored his first goal for Chelsea against Arsenal at Stamford Bridge in the London Derby, coming on as a substitute for Oscar, in a match which ended with a 6–0 win for the Blues. On 5 April, Salah opened the scoring and later won a penalty and an assist in Chelsea's 3–0 win over Stoke City.

Before the 2014–15 season, Salah's future with Chelsea looked to be in a balance after reports suggested he could be forced to return to Egypt to carry out military service after his registration for an education scheme was rescinded by the Egyptian Minister of Higher Education. He was spared of military service after the meeting with the then Egyptian prime minister Ibrahim Mahlab, the Minister of Higher Education and the Egyptian national manager Shawky Gharib. Salah changed squad numbers from 15 to 17 for the start of the season, with his new number having been vacated by Eden Hazard changing to number 10.

Salah was rarely used during the season. On 28 October 2014, in a 2–1 win at League Two club Shrewsbury Town in the fourth round of the League Cup, he took a shot that went so far off target that it went for a throw-in. After the game, he and fellow winger André Schürrle were criticized publicly by manager José Mourinho. Although Salah only made three league appearances before his loan move to Fiorentina, Mourinho stated that he would receive a replica winner's medal from the club for his contributions that season.

On transfer deadline, 2 February 2015, Chelsea confirmed that Salah would play for the Italian club Fiorentina on an 18-month loan until the end of the 2015–16 season, as part of a transfer deal which saw Juan Cuadrado moving in the opposite direction, Salah chose the number 74 shirt in honor of the victims of the Port Said Stadium riot. Six days after signing, he made his Fiorentina debut coming off the bench in the 65th minute as a replacement for Joaquín in a 3–2 Serie A victory against Atalanta at the Stadio Artemio Franchi.

Salah made his first start for Fiorentina on 14 February against Sassuolo, scoring his first goal for the club in the 30th minute. He then provided an assist to Khouma Babacar just two minutes after scoring; the match ended in a 3–1 win for Fiorentina. Twelve days after that, Salah scored his first European goal for Fiorentina, as his side advanced to the Round of 16 of the Europa League, beating Tottenham 3–1 on aggregate. Salah scored the winning goal for Fiorentina against Inter Milan on 1 March, his third goal in Serie A. Four days after that, Salah scored both of Fiorentina's goals in their 2–1 win away to Juventus in the Coppa Italia semi-final first leg. At the end of the season, Fiorentina reportedly activated an option to make the loan move permanent, but Salah refused the move. Even though the loan agreement was for 18 months, Salah refused to return to Fiorentina and instead joined fellow Serie A club Roma.

On 6 August 2015, Salah joined Roma on a season-long loan for €5 million; with the option to make the deal permanent, for a reported €15 million. He wore the number 11 shirt. He made his debut on 22 August, as the new season began with a 1–1 draw at Hellas Verona. On 11 September, ACF Fiorentina filed a complaint to FIFA with the claim that Chelsea alleging breach of contract when they allowed Salah to join Roma on loan. On 20 September, Salah scored his first goal of the season against Sassuolo to help Roma salvage a point as the match ended in a 2–2 draw. He went on to score in his following two matches, a 2–1 loss against Sampdoria and a 5–1 win against Carpi. On 25 October, Salah returned to the Stadio Artemio Franchi, scoring the opener against his former Serie A side Fiorentina to help earn a fourth straight league win for Roma. In his return, Salah was also sent off after picking up a second yellow in the closing minutes of the game, only seconds after picking up his first yellow. On 4 November, he scored the opening goal of a 3–2 UEFA Champions League win over Bayer Leverkusen.

On 2 February 2016, Salah scored in a 2–0 away win over Sassuolo. Ten days later, on 12 February, he scored in a 3–1 win over Carpi. On 21 February, he scored two goals in quick succession, in a 5–0 home win over Palermo. On 4 March, Salah scored twice in a 4–1 win over former club Fiorentina, overtaking them in the top three. A week later, on 11 March, he scored in a 1–1 draw with Bologna. On 2 May, he scored in a 3–2 away win over Genoa. On 14 May, he scored in a 3–1 away win over Milan on the last day of the league season, scoring the opening goal. At the end of the season, Salah was named Player of the Season, finishing as the club's top goalscorer with 15 goals in all competitions (14 in Serie A) and six assists.

On 3 August 2016, Roma made the deal permanent. On 20 August 2016, Salah scored his first goal of the season in a 4–0 win over Udinese. On 11 September, he scored in a 3–2 win over Sampdoria. Ten days later, on 21 September, he scored in a 4–0 win over Crotone. On 29 September, he scored in a 4–0 win over Astra Giurgiu in the group stages of the UEFA Europa League. On 15 October, he scored in a 3–1 win over Napoli. On 6 November, Salah scored a hat-trick in a 3–0 win over Bologna, his first club career hat-trick. On 9 March, he scored Roma's opening goal in an eventual 2–4 defeat to Lyon in the first leg of the round of sixteen in the UEFA Europa League. On 19 March, he scored in a 3–1 win over Sassuolo. On 9 April, he scored in a 3–0 win over Bologna. On 24 April, he scored twice in a 4–1 away league win over Pescara. On 20 May, he scored in a 5–3 away win over Chievo. On 28 May, in the final game of the season, Salah was substituted for legendary captain Francesco Totti, who was playing his final game with the club, in a 3–2 win over Genoa.

On 22 June 2017, Salah agreed a transfer to Liverpool. He signed a long-term contract with the Reds for an initial €42m fee that could rise to €50m. The fee was a club record, eclipsing the £35m spent on Andy Carroll in 2011. He was assigned the number 11 shirt previously worn by Roberto Firmino who instead switched to number 9. He joined the club on 1 July upon the opening of the summer transfer window, becoming Liverpool's first Egyptian player. He scored on his debut against Watford in a 3–3 draw on 12 August. On 24 August, Salah scored his second goal for Liverpool, in a 2017–18 UEFA Champions League play-off round 4–2 win (6–3 agg) against Hoffenheim, his first goal at Anfield. Three days later, Salah scored and assisted a goal in a 4–0 victory over Arsenal. For his performances in August, Salah was awarded Player of the Month by Liverpool supporters. On 17 October, Salah netted twice in a 7–0 Champions League win over Maribor, helping Liverpool to the joint-largest ever away win in the competition, and the largest away win by an English club.

On 26 November, Salah scored the opener and refused to celebrate in a 1–1 home draw with his former team Chelsea out of respect for the club as well as victims of the North Sinai Mosque attack two days earlier. Salah hit the top of the Premier League goal scoring charts by scoring twice after coming on as a substitute away at Stoke City on 29 November in a 3–0 win. The following month, Salah netted in a 4–0 win over AFC Bournemouth; a result which saw Liverpool become the first team in Premier League history to win four consecutive away league matches by a margin of at least three goals. In the process, he also became the joint-second fastest player to reach 20 goals for Liverpool on his 26th appearance, only behind George Allan who reached the milestone in 19 appearances in 1895.

On 17 March 2018, Salah scored four goals in a 5–0 win over Watford, which was his first hat-trick for Liverpool. In this game, he also broke a record of scoring 36 times in his debut season for Liverpool, and also became the leading goalscorer in Europe's top five leagues – overtaking Barcelona's Lionel Messi and Tottenham striker Harry Kane. Following Salah's record-breaking goal exploits former Liverpool captain Steven Gerrard stated "we are witnessing the start of greatness".

On 22 April 2018, Salah was awarded the PFA Players' Player of the Year award, having earlier been named in the PFA Team of the Year for the Premier League. Two days later, he scored a brace in a 5–2 Champions League semi-final first leg win over former club, Roma. In doing so, he simultaneously became the first player from Africa and the first Liverpool player to score 10 goals in a single campaign in the tournament. His double also took him to 43 goals for the season across all competitions, surpassing Roger Hunt's tally of 42, and making him Liverpool's second-highest goalscorer in a single season, behind Ian Rush. He had previously also broken the club's record for the Premier League era, surpassing Robbie Fowler's total of 36 goals set in the 1995–96 campaign, and Fernando Torres' record of 33 for the most goals by a Liverpool player in a debut season. After his two goals and assists in the first leg against Roma, Salah featured in the second leg as Liverpool beat Roma 6–7 on aggregate to qualify for the final for the first time in eleven years. He would then become the Premier League's all-time goalscorer for a 38 game season, registering his 32nd league goal in a 4–0 win against Brighton & Hove Albion en route to being awarded the Premier League Golden Boot.

In the 2018 UEFA Champions League Final against Real Madrid, Salah injured his left shoulder in the 30th minute. After initially carrying on, he left the field in tears after going to ground in a challenge with Madrid defender Sergio Ramos; the match ended in a 3–1 defeat. The Egyptian FA stated that this would have no effect on his playing at the 2018 World Cup in Russia and that Salah would still be named in the team's final squad on 4 June. The day after the match, Ramos wrote a message and sent him good wishes.

On 2 July 2018, Salah signed a new long-term contract with Liverpool. Manager Jürgen Klopp said the news was important as a statement of intent in terms of Liverpool's status in the football world in having Salah commit himself further to the club. On 12 August, Salah scored his first goal of the season and Liverpool's first overall goal of the season, in a 4–0 win over West Ham United. On 20 August, in a 2–0 away win over Crystal Palace, Salah played a part in both of Liverpool's goals; winning a penalty for the first after being kicked in the shins twice, and providing an assist for Sadio Mané for the second. On 25 August, Salah scored the only goal in Liverpool's 1–0 win over Brighton & Hove Albion.

On 30 August 2018, Salah was named on the three-man shortlist for the UEFA Men's Player of the Year, coming in third place, and was also included on the three-man shortlist for the UEFA Forward of the Season, coming in second place. On 3 September he was named on the three-man shortlist for the Best FIFA Men's Player, finishing third. Amid controversy and online protest, Salah received the 2018 FIFA Puskás Award for goal of the year, the winning strike his goal at Anfield in his first Merseyside derby. On 24 October, Salah scored twice against Red Star Belgrade in the UEFA Champions League group stage, with his second goal his 50th for the club. With 50 goals in 65 games he is the fastest player in Liverpool history to reach the half century.

On 8 December, Salah scored a hat-trick in a 4–0 away win over Bournemouth, to move Liverpool to the top of the league table. On 11 December, he scored the winning goal in a 1–0 win over Napoli in their final Champions League group fixture, the result qualifying Liverpool to the round of sixteen. On 19 January 2019, he scored his 50th Premier League goal with a brace in a 4–3 win over Crystal Palace, reaching the tally in 72 appearances. In doing so, he became the joint-fourth fastest player to achieve the milestone, alongside Fernando Torres, and behind only Andy Cole, Alan Shearer and Ruud van Nistelrooy.

In February 2019 West Ham United said they were investigating a video which allegedly showed fans racially abusing Salah, including for being Muslim.

Salah made 11 appearances for the Egypt U-20 team and 11 for the Egypt U-23 team, representing Egypt in both 2011 FIFA U-20 World Cup and the 2012 Summer Olympics, scoring a penalty against Argentina in the round of sixteen of the former tournament, with Egypt losing the match 1–2.

Salah was selected for the youth squad to play at the 2012 Summer Olympics scoring in all three of the team's group games. In their opening match on 26 July, he scored Egypt's second goal in a 2–3 defeat to Brazil he scored the equalizer in their 1–1 draw against New Zealand played on 29 July, before scoring Egypt's opening goal in a 3–1 win over Belarus in their final group stage game played on 1 August, securing advancement into the knockout stage of the tournament, where Egypt were eliminated following a 0–3 quarter-final defeat to Japan on 4 August.

On 3 September 2011, Salah made his debut for the Egypt national football team in the 2–1 away defeat by Sierra Leone. He scored his first goal for Egypt's first team in the 3–0 win against Niger a month later, on 8 October, in qualifying for the 2012 Africa Cup of Nations.

On 10 June 2012, he scored a goal in the 93rd minute in stoppage time against Guinea to give Egypt an important 3–2 away victory in a 2014 World Cup qualifier. On 9 June 2013, Salah scored a hat-trick in a 4–2 away win against Zimbabwe as Egypt won their fourth consecutive match in the World Cup qualifiers. A week later in the following match, he scored the only goal away to Mozambique, putting Egypt into the final qualifying group. On 10 September, Salah scored his sixth tournament goal in a 4–2 win over Guinea, securing Egypt a 100% record to finish their qualifying group and becoming the joint-top scorer among all African teams in the qualification stages.

On 10 October 2014, Salah scored in a 2–0 win over Botswana, also scoring in the return fixture on five days later on 15 October, in qualifying for the 2015 Africa Cup of Nations. On 19 November, Salah scored the opening goal in a 1–2 away defeat to Tunisia, as Egypt missed out on qualifying for the Africa Cup of Nations finals for a third consecutive time, with their latest successful qualification being in 2010, when they won the competition for a third straight time.

Salah was a member of the Pharaohs' squad for the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations held in Gabon. On 25 January, he scored in Egypt's 1–0 win over Ghana to secure first place in Group D. He went all the way to the final with Egypt, scoring twice and assisting two times in 6 games, earning him a place in the CAF Team of the Tournament.

Salah was the top scorer for Egypt with five goals during the 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification, including both goals in the decisive 2–1 victory over Congo, one of which was a penalty in the last minute to make the Pharaohs reach their first World Cup finals since 1990. Despite doubts over his fitness following his shoulder injury, Salah was included in Egypt's 29-man provisional squad for the 2018 FIFA World Cup and was included in their final 23-man squad on 4 June. He missed Egypt's opening match against Uruguay on 15 June, which the Pharaohs lost 1–0, conceding in the 89th minute. On 19 June, Salah scored a penalty in Egypt's 3–1 defeat to hosts Russia at the Krestovsky Stadium, Saint Petersburg. In Egypt's final group game on 25 June, Salah scored his second goal of the World Cup with a chip over the goalkeeper in Egypt's 2–1 defeat to Saudi Arabia at Volgograd Arena.

On 8 September, in a 6–0 win over Niger in qualifying for the 2019 Africa Cup of Nations, Salah scored two goals, provided two assists and also missed two penalties. His first penalty, in the first minute of the game, was saved, while the second he converted the loose ball after it was initially saved.

A quick, mobile, hard-working and tactical player, with good technique and an eye for goal, Salah is predominantly known for his speed, movement, clinical finishing, agility, dribbling skills, first touch, and ball control, as well as his ability to use both his pace and flair on the ball in order to beat opponents, and create scoring opportunities for himself or his teammates. A versatile forward, he primarily plays as a winger on the right flank, a position which allows him to cut into the centre onto his stronger left foot, and either shoot on goal or play quick exchanges with other players and make runs in behind the defence towards goal; he can also play in the centre behind the main striker as either an attacking midfielder or second striker.

On his increased threat in front of goal since joining Liverpool, Salah credits Liverpool manager Jürgen Klopp’s request for him to occupy more advanced central positions, often operating as a main striker, with the forward telling ESPN, "I play closer to the goal than any club before." Salah initially started his career at the left-back position, however, following a 4–0 win over the youth team of Egyptian club ENPPI, Salah was in tears for not scoring after missing several clear chances; this made his coach realize his passion for scoring goals, forcing him to move him to a forward position.

While playing Al Mokawloon, American soccer coach Bob Bradley saw Salah play and noted his prodigious speed, explosiveness, and intelligence on the pitch, already evident at his young age. Upon signing for Chelsea, José Mourinho said of Salah: "He's young, he's fast, he's creative, he's enthusiastic. When we analysed him he looks the kind of humble personality on the pitch, ready to work for the team." Mourinho added that Salah has "similar qualities" with "talented players" that he had worked with, such as Gareth Bale and Arjen Robben. His technical skills, pace, left foot, goalscoring, position and direct playing style led him to be nicknamed the "Egyptian Messi", in the Italian media. Brazilian World Cup winner Ronaldo – whom Salah idolized while growing up – stated, "Salah is an incredible player with a tremendous quality. He looks like Messi." Salah has also received praise for having never celebrated scoring a goal against any of his former clubs.

Mohamed Salah married Maggi in 2013. Their daughter, Makka, born in 2014 is named in honor of the Islamic holy city of Mecca. Salah is Muslim and often celebrates goals by performing the sujud.

Salah features in EA Sports' "FIFA" video game series: on "FIFA 18" he had a rating of 87 and a potential of 90 following his displays for Liverpool. In a 2018 poll by FIFPLAY, a website run and made for the game's fans, Salah ranked first (ahead of Lionel Messi) on who should be the global cover star for "FIFA 19", obtaining 77 percent of the total number of votes.

Salah has a sponsorship deal with sportswear and equipment supplier Adidas: he wears Adidas X18 football boots. He appeared in an Adidas 2018 World Cup commercial along with other players in the Adidas stable, including David Beckham, Lionel Messi and Paul Pogba, and singer Pharrell Williams. In March 2018, Salah appeared in advertisement for Vodafone Egypt, being filmed visiting several Merseyside landmarks, with the video originally being released in Arabic but was also translated to English.

Salah is active in regeneration projects in Nagrig, his hometown where 65% of people live in poverty, donating money to help build a school and hospital. During his time in Egypt, Salah's family was once robbed, however, the thief was caught and arrested by police, with Salah's father preparing to press charges against him, but Salah convinced him to drop the case. Afterwards, Salah helped the thief financially, giving him some money and trying to find him a job. In February 2018, following a match against Tottenham, Salah donated a replica shirt to young supporter Mohamed Abdel Karim, who was previously pictured wearing a jumper reading Salah's name and shirt number. Moreover, Mohamed Salah has helped more than 450 families by giving them monthly allowances and he also helped the government by giving approximately $300,000 when the country was in a bad situation.

At the 2018 FIFA World Cup, in which Egypt were based in Chechnya, Salah agreed to posing with Ramzan Kadyrov, after the Chechen leader made a surprise visit to the team's hotel and requested a photo shoot with him at the stadium during their team training. Kadyrov later gave him honorary citizenship of the Chechen Republic in a public dinner made for the whole Egypt national team and officials. Several western news outlets and NGOs criticised Salah and the EFA for their interactions with Kadyrov, citing the president's alleged human rights abuses and that the player is used for 'political propaganda' by the dictator during Egypt's national team training camp in Chechnya.

In August 2018, Liverpool referred Salah to Merseyside police after footage was posted online which showed him allegedly using a phone while driving in traffic. Salah's indiscretion was brought to light after autograph hunter Rob Wylie posted a video online apparently showing the Egyptian ignoring requests for autographs. Wylie, whose conduct had previously resulted in Liverpool instituting a policy which banned players giving autographs from their vehicles, received widespread criticism from the club's supporters and had to temporarily shut down his website.

Salah's relationship with the Egyptian Football Association (EFA) was reported to have soured during the World Cup, after his image was used without his permission to promote the national team's sponsor, WE, the mobile service of Telecom Egypt. At the time of the incident, Salah was sponsored by WE's telecommunications rivals, Vodafone.

Liverpool fans created a chant to the tune of Dodgy's "Good Enough", saying that if Salah continued to score goals, they would convert to Islam – "If he's good enough for you, he's good enough for me, if he scores another few, then I'll be Muslim too." Salah gave his approval to the chant, and it has been cited as an example of inclusivity. Salah is devout to a degree that many other well-known Muslims sports figures are not, and his charm and apolitical persona have made him a popular figure in the UK. During his goal celebration, Salah lays in the prostrate position to thank god in sujud. It appears in "FIFA 19".

Salah is nicknamed "The Pharaoh" by the press and his fans. Salah was given the nickname "Egyptian King" by Liverpool supporters, arising from a chant set to the tune of "Sit Down" by English band James.

Following his goal that led Egypt to the World Cup finals for the first time since 1990, a school in Egypt was named after him. Following Egypt's exit from the World Cup, Salah stayed in his home country for his pre-season holiday. In late June, his address was accidentally leaked on Facebook. After this, crowds of fans showed up at Salah's house, with Salah greeting the fans and signing autographs for some, although according to reports in Spain, police did arrive to cordon off his house.

During Liverpool's pre-season tour in the U.S. an American artist named Brandan Odums created a mural in the Times Square area displaying Salah in the Egypt kit, with the player later posting an image on social media posing next to it. In Egypt, several murals have also been created displaying Salah's likeness, including one in the capital of Cairo.

Basel

Liverpool

Egypt U20

Egypt











</doc>
<doc id="58018360" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58018360" title="Joe Gomez">
Joe Gomez

Joe Gomez may refer to:



</doc>
<doc id="56764068" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56764068" title="Alisson">
Alisson

Alisson may refer to the following association footballers:




</doc>
<doc id="20027350" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20027350" title="Jordan Henderson">
Jordan Henderson

Jordan Brian Henderson (born 17 June 1990) is an English professional footballer who captains club Liverpool and plays for the English national team. He is usually deployed as a central midfielder for both club and country.

Henderson began his career at Sunderland in 2008, with a loan spell at Coventry City in 2009, before moving to Liverpool in 2011. He became captain of Liverpool in 2015 following the departure of Steven Gerrard. In 2010, Henderson won his first cap for England, having previously played for and captained the under-21 team. He has represented the country at UEFA Euro 2012 and 2016, and the 2014 and 2018 FIFA World Cups.

Henderson was born in Sunderland, Tyne and Wear and joined the youth system of his hometown club Sunderland aged eight. He signed a professional contract with the club on 1 July 2008. He played his first league match for Sunderland as a half-time substitute on 1 November 2008 in a 5–0 away defeat to Chelsea. He then made his first Sunderland start and home debut against Blackburn Rovers in the League Cup.

In January 2009, Henderson joined Championship club Coventry City on a one-month loan deal. He made his Coventry debut in a 2–1 defeat to Derby County. Henderson's loan to Coventry was extended until the end of the season, and he scored the first senior goal of his career on 28 February 2009 against Norwich City. After picking up an injury, a fracture to the fifth metatarsal bone in his foot, he returned to Sunderland in April 2009.

In the 2009–10 season, Henderson broke into the Sunderland first team and made several Premier League appearances. He scored his first senior goal for the club against Birmingham City in the League Cup third round. He then went on to score his first Premier League goal against Manchester City on 19 December 2009.

Henderson spent the majority of the season on the right side of midfield but played centrally in the absence of Lee Cattermole; his versatility and consistency earning him a new five-year contract on 23 April 2010, keeping him with the club until 2015. He also went on to win the Sunderland Young Player of the Year award for the 2009–10 season.

On 13 January 2011, Henderson was listed on the official FIFA website as one of 13 young players to watch in 2011. He was named Sunderland's Young Player of the Year for the second season running.

On 9 June 2011, Henderson was transferred to Liverpool for an undisclosed fee, thought to be between £16 and £20 million. He made his debut in Liverpool's first match of the 2011–12 Premier League, a 1–1 draw against his former club Sunderland where he was given a mixed reception by Sunderland fans. On 27 August 2011, Henderson scored his first goal for Liverpool in a Premier League fixture at Anfield against Bolton Wanderers. On 26 February 2012, Henderson started on the right of midfield in Liverpool's 2012 League Cup Final victory over Cardiff City before being substituted in the 58th minute. On 5 May, he played the full 90 minutes as Liverpool were beaten 2–1 by Chelsea in the 2012 FA Cup Final. Henderson ended the 2011–12 season with two goals from 44 appearances.

In August 2012, Henderson was told he would be allowed to join Fulham by new manager Brendan Rodgers, but this was rejected by the player. He went on to score his first European goal for Liverpool on 6 December 2012, with the winner against Udinese in the UEFA Europa League as the "Reds" qualified for the last 32.

Henderson established himself as a regular member of the Liverpool team in the 2013–14 season, playing in 35 Premier League matches before he received his first career red card in a 3–2 win over Manchester City on 13 April 2014, resulting in an automatic three match ban which meant he would miss three of Liverpool's last four matches. On 29 September, he made his 100th appearance for the club as Liverpool won 1–3 at Sunderland.

Henderson started the season in good form, providing two assists in Liverpool's first three league matches, and was named as the club's vice-captain following the departure of Daniel Agger. On 29 November, Henderson started as the captain for the first time for Liverpool in the Premier League against Stoke City as Steven Gerrard stayed on the bench. On 2 December, Henderson marked his 150th appearance for the club by scoring the third goal in a 3–1 win against Leicester City to confirm the win. Henderson started many Liverpool matches as captain as Gerrard was out injured or being rested on the bench. On 23 April, Henderson signed a five-year contract extension at Liverpool worth £100,000 a week.

Following the departure of Steven Gerrard in June 2015, Henderson was made captain of Liverpool. After aggravating a heel injury Henderson underwent surgery, but broke a bone in his right foot before he could rejoin the starting line-up. It was reported that Henderson's heel problems stemmed from the incurable condition plantar fasciitis.

Henderson started the 2016–17 season with regular appearance in the starting eleven and on 16 September scored a spectacular 25-yard strike in a 2–1 win over Chelsea at Stamford Bridge. The strike earned him the Premier League Goal of the Month award for the month of September.

Henderson signed a new five-year deal at Liverpool in 2018 after leading the club to its first UEFA Champions League final in over a decade. After signing the contract, Henderson emphasised his intentions to remain at Liverpool for as long as possible and ideally the remainder of his career. On 24 November, Henderson was sent off after receiving a second yellow card in a 3–0 win against Watford, meaning he would miss the Merseyside derby on 2 December.

Henderson has represented England at four levels. He made his debut for the under-19s against the Czech Republic in 2009, before breaking into Stuart Pearce's under-21 squad. He scored his first goal in an England shirt in the European U21 Championship play-offs against Romania, hitting a volley from outside the box to give England the lead.

Henderson was selected in the England U21 squad for the 2011 European Championships. However, England were knocked out in the group stage. He captained the England U21 team in a 6–0 win over Azerbaijan U21 on 1 September 2011, scoring one goal in the Euro 2013 qualifier. He then scored his fourth under-21 goal in a 2–1 win away at Norway, maintaining England's 100% record in Euro 2013 qualification. On 3 February 2013, Henderson was named the England U21 Player of the Year in the inaugural year of the award. He captained the under-21 team at the 2013 UEFA European Under-21 Championship.

On 11 November 2010, Henderson was omitted from England's U21 squad for their friendly with Germany, instead receiving his first call up to the senior England squad on 17 November 2010 for their friendly against France. He made his debut in the match, playing from the start in central midfield alongside Steven Gerrard.

Initially named as a standby player, Henderson was called up to the England Euro 2012 squad to replace the injured Frank Lampard. He featured in England's first match of the tournament against France, coming on as a late substitute for Scott Parker, and again featured as a substitute, coming on during extra-time, in England's quarter-final penalty shoot-out defeat to Italy.

Henderson was selected in Roy Hodgson's 23-man squad to travel to Brazil for the 2014 FIFA World Cup. He started in England's opening two World Cup group matches, 2–1 losses to Italy in Manaus and to Uruguay in São Paulo.

Henderson also went to Euro 2016 with Roy Hodgson in France. He only played one match, that being the final group match against Slovakia which ended 0–0 as England finished second in their group.

He was named in the 23-man England national team squad for the 2018 FIFA World Cup. In England's Round of 16 match against Colombia, Henderson was the only Three Lions player to miss a spot-kick as the match went to penalties. England still won though, 4–3, and made it to the semi-finals.

Henderson plays as a box-to-box midfielder although under Jürgen Klopp, he has mostly been used as a defensive midfielder. He is widely regarded as a player who works hard and brings energy to the team. Described as an "athletic and hardworking midfielder," Henderson has developed his game during his time at Liverpool into a more creative player. Furthermore, he constantly presses high up the field whenever the opposition is in possession.

Henderson was schooled at Farringdon Community Sports College before joining Sunderland as a youngster. He is a Sunderland fan and was spotted at the 2014 League Cup Final with the Sunderland fans, whilst being a player at Liverpool. On the same day as being named Liverpool captain, it was announced he would also be featuring alongside Lionel Messi on the cover of the UK edition of "FIFA 16".

Liverpool

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="4877697" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4877697" title="Daniel Sturridge">
Daniel Sturridge

Daniel Andre Sturridge (; born 1 September 1989) is an English professional footballer who plays as a striker for club Liverpool and the English national team. 

Born in Birmingham, Sturridge spent four years in the Aston Villa academy before moving to Coventry City. He then signed for Manchester City in 2003. He continued his development at City and played in two FA Youth Cup finals. He made his first-team debut in the 2007–08 season, becoming the only player ever to score in the FA Youth Cup, FA Cup and Premier League in the same season. He left City in 2009 and signed for Chelsea, where he was loaned out to Bolton Wanderers for the second half of the 2010–11 season. After a successful spell at Bolton, scoring eight goals in 12 appearances, he returned to Chelsea for the 2011–12 season. He left Chelsea to join Liverpool in January 2013, where he formed an attacking partnership with Luis Suárez dubbed SAS, with Liverpool scoring more than 100 league goals in the 2013–14 season with Sturridge scoring 21 – the pair of them having a 1–2 in the goal scoring stats of the league. The following two seasons were curtailed by a myriad of injuries, limiting Sturridge to very few appearances.

Sturridge has represented England at all levels. He made 15 appearances and scored four goals for the under-21 team. He made his debut for England against Sweden on 15 November 2011 and was selected for the 2012 Summer Olympics, the 2014 FIFA World Cup and UEFA Euro 2016.

Born in Birmingham, West Midlands, Sturridge began his playing career at the age of six at local club Cadbury Athletic, before being spotted at the age of seven by the youth academy of Aston Villa. He left Villa four years later to move to Coventry City, from where he joined Manchester City's Academy in 2003, aged 13. A Football League committee later ordered Manchester City to pay Coventry £30,000 compensation, with further payments up to a maximum of £200,000 based upon appearances and international honours. The following year, he was the leading scorer and voted player of the tournament (the only other person to achieve this was Argentine footballer Carlos Tevez) as City won the Nike Cup, the world's largest under-15 tournament. At 16, he played for Manchester City Youth during their 2006 FA Youth Cup run. The youngest player in the team, he scored four goals en route to the final, and another two in the final, though they were insufficient to prevent a 3–2 aggregate defeat to Liverpool. That summer, he signed his first professional contract, which came into effect when he turned 17.

From the start of the 2006–07 season, Sturridge began to train with the City first team. A hat-trick in a reserve match was rewarded by a place on the substitutes' bench for the senior team's match with Reading in February 2007. He duly made his debut from the bench, replacing Georgios Samaras for the final quarter-hour. He made a second substitute appearance a month later, but then suffered a hip injury which sidelined him for the remainder of 2007.

Sturridge scored his first goal for City on 27 January 2008 in an FA Cup match against Sheffield United, followed three days later by his first league goal on his full debut, against Derby County. However, first-team opportunities were sporadic, so Sturridge continued to play for the youth team in the FA Youth Cup. City again reached the final, with Sturridge the leading scorer in the competition. This time City won the final, with Sturridge scoring in the first leg. In the 2007–08 season, Sturridge became the only player ever to score in the Youth FA Cup, the FA Cup and the Premier League in the same season.

Sturridge contributed in the 2008–09 season with 26 appearances and scoring 4 goals. On 28 December 2008, in a league match against Blackburn Rovers, City was trailing at by 2–0. Coming on as a 71st-minute substitute, Sturridge scored in the 88th minute of the match owing taking advantage of a header by André Ooijer. He also went on to assist Robinho's injury time goal. Manager Mark Hughes said that Sturridge was a player with great potential and had an impact in the game. He also praised his assist, saying "he picked out Robinho for the equaliser in an area where we had been struggling to find him". At the end of the season, he was voted as the club's Young Player of the Year.

With Sturridge's contract at Manchester City expired, he signed for Chelsea on a four-year contract on 3 July 2009. As Sturridge was under the age of 24, and the two clubs were unable to agree a deal, the fee for Sturridge was decided by a tribunal. The Professional Football Compensation Committee decided on 14 January 2010 that Chelsea would pay an initial fee of £3.5 million, with additional payments of £500,000 after each of 10, 20, 30 and 40 appearances. There would also be a further payment of £1 million if Sturridge made a full international appearance, and Manchester City in addition would receive 15 percent of any sell-on fee if Sturridge was transferred, after these add ons the fee for the player reached an eventual fee of £8.3m.

Sturridge made his Premier League debut for Chelsea on 18 August 2009 against Sunderland, coming on for Didier Drogba. On 16 September, Sturridge scored a hat-trick in a reserve match against Ipswich Town. On 28 October, he made his first start for the club in a League Cup win against Bolton Wanderers at Stamford Bridge.

On 20 December, Sturridge came on as a substitute at half time against West Ham United and won Chelsea a controversial penalty that Lampard converted. He made his first start in the Premier League for Chelsea away against Birmingham City on Boxing Day and scored his first two goals for Chelsea against Watford in the FA Cup third round on 3 January 2010. Sturridge continued to show his ability with a real poacher's effort in a 2–0 victory in the FA Cup against Preston North End, scoring his third goal for Chelsea in January. On 13 February, he netted again against Cardiff City, as Chelsea won 4–1. Sturridge scored his first League goal for Chelsea on 25 April 2010, in a 7–0 victory over Stoke City at Stamford Bridge, by latching onto a through ball, before rounding goalkeeper Asmir Begović and slotting the ball home. During the 2010 FA Cup Final, he came on as a 90th-minute substitute for Chelsea as they won 1–0 against Portsmouth. Sturridge finished the 2009–10 FA Cup campaign as the leading scorer for Chelsea with four goals.

On 15 September 2010, Sturridge made his full UEFA Champions League debut against Slovakian team MŠK Žilina. He scored on his debut, his first Champions League tally, in a 4–1 away victory. In the Premier League, in a 1–0 loss to his former club Manchester City, Sturridge came on as a substitute for striker Didier Drogba. He scored his second goal in the Champions League against Žilina, which Chelsea went on to win 2–1 at home. Later that season, he scored two right-footed goals against Ipswich Town.

On 31 January 2011, Sturridge agreed to join Bolton Wanderers on a loan deal until the end of the season. He made his debut two days later, coming on as a substitute at home to Wolverhampton Wanderers, scoring his first goal in the process, an injury time winner. He followed this with another goal in the defeat to Tottenham Hotspur the following weekend, in which he made his first start, before scoring his third goal in three matches in the 2–0 victory over Everton. After Sturridge scored the equaliser against Newcastle United in his fourth match, he became only the sixth player to score in his first four matches for a club in the Premier League. Sturridge continued to make an impact at Bolton and finished his loan spell with eight goals in 12 appearances at the club. Having never been booked in his career, Sturridge received his first ever red card in the final match of the season against former club Manchester City.

Having received a red card in his final match for Bolton, Sturridge was suspended for the first three competitive matches in the 2011–12 season for Chelsea. Despite rumours linking him with a move away on deadline day, Sturridge remained in West London amidst strong support from his manager André Villas-Boas, who said, "He would have been playing if he was not suspended from last season." In his first match back from suspension, at Sunderland, Sturridge started and scored with a back-heel in the 50th minute to put Chelsea up 2–0 in an eventual 2–1 victory. Sturridge returned to the Reebok Stadium on 2 October 2011, scoring twice within the first 30 minutes, the first a header after 90 seconds from a corner and the second a long-shot from outside the box that goalkeeper Ádám Bogdán erred in saving. Sturridge also provided an assist to Frank Lampard's goal in the 15th minute of the match, which eventually ended 5–1. On 15 October 2011, Sturrdge scored against Everton in a 3–1 win, giving him four league goals in four matches. He then came on as a substitute in the League Cup match against Everton on the 90th-minute, in which he scored a 116th-minute winner, which saw Chelsea win 2–1 in extra time to put them in the last eight.

Sturridge scored his seventh goal in the Premier League season in a 3–0 victory for Chelsea against Newcastle. On 13 December, during the fixture against Sturridge former club Manchester City at Stamford Bridge, Sturridge provided an assist for a Raul Meireles goal in the 34th minute. The match ended a 2–1 victory, when Frank Lampard scored a late penalty after Joleon Lescott handled Sturridge's shot in the penalty area. Sturridge scored in the away 1–1 draw against Wigan Athletic; he controlled Ashley Cole's diagonal long ball with his left foot, then scored with his right from a tight angle to give Chelsea the lead in the 59th minute. On 22 December, during Chelsea's away clash with Tottenham, he scored his ninth goal in the 2011–12 domestic season, the equaliser in a 1–1 draw away at White Hart Lane. Sturridge scored his team's first goal in a 4–2 win against Aston Villa. He scored the opener in fantastic style after 45 seconds with his 11th Premier League goal of the season against local rivals Queens Park Rangers on 29 April, which Chelsea ran out 6–1 winners to keep Champions League qualification alive. He was an unused substitute as Chelsea won the 2012 UEFA Champions League Final.

Sturridge missed all of Chelsea's pre-season matches to begin the 2012–13 campaign, as he was on duty with Great Britain in the 2012 Summer Olympics. He did, however, play against Manchester City in the 2012 FA Community Shield, assisting Ryan Bertrand's goal, by shooting and Costel Pantilimon spilling it. Sturridge missed the first 2012–13 UEFA Champions League group stage matches against Juventus and Nordsjælland and the first League Cup match against Wolverhampton. He also missed the Premier League match against Stoke City with a hamstring injury. He scored the last Premier League goal for the club in the 4–2 win against Tottenham at White Hart Lane after coming on as a late substitute and scoring from Juan Mata's cross in stoppage time to seal victory. His last goal for Chelsea was against Manchester United in the League Cup, scoring in extra time in the 5–4 win. After Blues manager Roberto Di Matteo was sacked as manager and replaced by Rafael Benítez, Sturridge was never to play for the club again due to injury.

On 2 January 2013, Sturridge completed a move from Chelsea to Liverpool, signing a long-term contract for an undisclosed fee thought to be in the region of £12 million. He made his debut on 6 January against Mansfield Town in the FA Cup third round, scoring his first Liverpool goal after just seven minutes in a match which Liverpool won 2–1. He scored on his league debut after coming on as a half-time substitute the following weekend, scoring in a 2–1 defeat against rivals and league leaders Manchester United at Old Trafford on 13 January. Sturridge scored his third goal for Liverpool in his first league start and home debut for the club, a 5–0 win against Norwich City at Anfield on 19 January. With the goal, he had scored three goals in his first three appearances for the club, becoming the first Liverpool player since Ray Kennedy in 1974 to accomplish the feat, despite not yet playing a full 90 minutes for the club. On 3 February, Sturridge scored a goal from 25 yards-out against former club Manchester City in a 2–2 draw at the City of Manchester Stadium. Sturridge continued this run of form on 17 February, with an assist for teammate José Enrique, as well as scoring a penalty against Swansea City in a 5–0 win, having missed the prior two matches due to a combination of ineligibility and injury. He also scored against former club Chelsea in a 2–2 draw at Anfield, the match of teammate Luis Suárez's biting incident with Blues defender Branislav Ivanović, which led to a ten-match ban for Suárez. Sturridge scored two goals and notched an assist in a 6–0 win over Newcastle United on 27 April at St James' Park. On 12 May, he scored his first career hat-trick, in a 3–1 win against Fulham at Craven Cottage.

Sturridge began the 2013–14 season by scoring the first goal of the season – which also turned out to be the only goal in Liverpool's 1–0 win over Stoke City – with a shot from outside the box. He then followed this up with a goal against Aston Villa in another 1–0 win and a brace against Notts County in the League Cup, taking his season's tally to four goals in three matches. He continued his fine form by scoring the only goal in a 1–0 win against fierce rivals and defending champions Manchester United on his 24th birthday at Anfield, and giving a man of the match performance in a 3–1 win away at Sunderland by scoring and providing two assists for Luis Suárez. These performances earned Sturridge the season's first Premier League Player of the Month award for the month of August. On 23 November, he came off the bench to score a last-minute equaliser against Everton in a thrilling Merseyside derby that finished 3–3.

Sturridge's impressive goal-scoring form continued into the new year, with Sturridge becoming the first Liverpool player in the Premier League era to score in seven consecutive league matches when he found the net at Craven Cottage against Fulham. He went on to become only the second player in Premier League history to score eight matches in a row after a brace against Swansea City in a 4–3 home win. He was then named Player of the Month for the second time in the season for February, scoring five goals and earned two assists during the month.

On 18 April, Sturridge was named as one of the six players on the shortlist for the PFA Players' Player of the Year award and was also nominated for the PFA Young Player of the Year award. On 27 April, he was named alongside teammates Steven Gerrard and Luis Suárez in the PFA Team of the Year. Sturridge's haul of 21 league goals made him the runner-up in the season's Premier League Golden Boot, behind strike partner Suárez.

Sturridge started the 2014–15 season scoring a late winner in Liverpool's opening match, a 2–1 win over Southampton. While on international duty, Sturridge incurred a thigh injury and forced out of action for up to three weeks. On 11 September, manager Brendan Rodgers publicly criticised England's handling of Sturridge, stating his injury "could have been preventable." Despite rumours, England manager Roy Hodgson rejected talk of a rift between him and Rodgers over Sturridge's injury.

Sturridge was ruled out for another three more weeks after suffering another calf injury during training on 17 October. On 18 November, he broke down in training with a new thigh injury which saw him miss the next six weeks.

After missing close to five months, Sturridge made his return to the team on 31 January in a 2–0 win over West Ham as a 68th-minute substitute for Lazar Marković, scoring in the 87th minute after a through ball from Philippe Coutinho. On 4 March, Sturridge scored the second goal in a 2–0 win over Burnley.

Sturridge's injury-plagued season continued when he picked up a hip injury on 22 March in a 2–1 loss to rivals Manchester United, despite scoring Liverpool's lone goal. On 5 May, he underwent a successful hip operation in the United States that ruled him out until September, meaning he would miss the start of the new season.

After missing the first five matches of Liverpool's Premier League campaign due to injury, Sturridge made his first appearance of the season against Norwich City on 20 September 2015. He scored his first two goals of the season in a 3–2 victory against Aston Villa on 26 September. On 15 October, Sturridge suffered a knee injury in training that would rule him out another four weeks.

On 2 December, he scored a brace in a 6–1 away win over Southampton in the quarter-final of the League Cup. Four days later he suffered another hamstring injury in a 2–0 defeat to Newcastle United, that ruled him out for two months. He returned to the team on 14 February 2016, scoring in a 6–0 win over Aston Villa at Villa Park. 14 days later, he started in the 2016 League Cup Final loss to Manchester City, playing the full 120 minutes as Liverpool were defeated in a penalty shoot-out.

On 10 March 2016, he scored his first Europa League goal for Liverpool in a 2–0 win over rivals Manchester United at Anfield. He scored his 50th goal for Liverpool in all competitions on 20 April, in a 4–0 win at home in the Merseyside derby; he is the fourth fastest Liverpool player to reach that landmark, doing so in 87 appearances.

On 5 May 2016, Sturridge scored his 12th goal of the season in Liverpool's 3–0 defeat of Villarreal CF in the Europa League semi-final second leg to qualify the team for the 2016 UEFA Europa League Final. On 19 May, Sturridge scored the opening goal of the Europa League Final, an eventual 3–1 loss to Sevilla in Basel. Sturridge ended the season as Liverpool's top scorer with 13 goals.

Sturridge began the season as an understudy to Roberto Firmino and generally came off the bench during the second half in league matches. On 23 August, Sturridge started the match against Burton Albion in the EFL Cup and scored a brace in the 5–0 win for Liverpool. Sturridge started in the fourth round of the EFL Cup against Tottenham on 25 October and scored a brace in a 2–1 win for Liverpool at Anfield. He scored his first league goal of the season on 27 December, scoring within one minute of coming on as a second-half substitute against Stoke. Sturridge's goal, Liverpool's fourth on the night and 86th for the season, saw the club break its record for goals scored in a calendar year.

On 27 August 2017, Sturridge scored in a 4–0 win over Arsenal, just three minutes after coming on as a substitute. On 28 October, he scored the opening goal in a 3–0 win over Huddersfield Town. On 1 November, he scored in a 3–0 win over Maribor in the UEFA Champions League.

On 29 January 2018, Sturridge joined West Bromwich Albion on loan for the remainder of the 2017–18 season. On 12 February, in just his third appearance for West Brom since joining on loan, Sturridge suffered a hamstring injury after three minutes of playing in a 3–0 away defeat to Chelsea.

Back in Liverpool colours, on 12 August 2018, Sturridge scored with his first touch after 24 seconds coming on as a substitute in a 4–0 win over West Ham United. On 18 September, he scored the opening goal of a 3–2 win over Paris Saint-Germain in the opening match of the UEFA Champions League. On 26 September, he scored the opening goal against his former club Chelsea in the EFL Cup third round, though Liverpool eventually lost the match 1–2. Three days later Sturridge scored the equalising goal – and 50th league goal of his Liverpool career – with a 25-yard curler in the 89th minute to earn a 1–1 draw with Chelsea at Stamford Bridge, which was later voted as Premier League Goal of the Month for September.

Sturridge has represented England at U16, U17, U18, U19, U20 and U21 levels. He scored twice against the Netherlands for the under-18 team in 2007, netting again in the Under-19 European Championships against the Netherlands. He scored the only goal for England U21 in a 1–1 draw against Greece U-21 in Greece and scored his second U-21 goal in the 1–0 win over Portugal.

He was named in the England under-21 squad for the 2011 UEFA European Under-21 Championship. England was eliminated in the group stages. Sturridge was selected to the team of the tournament.

On 6 November 2011, Sturridge was handed his maiden England call-up by being named in the England squad for the friendlies against Spain and Sweden, after excelling for Chelsea. He was an unused substitute in a 1–0 victory against Spain, but Fabio Capello insisted that Sturridge would play against Sweden the following Tuesday and did, as he made his debut coming on as a second-half substitute for Theo Walcott. He made his second appearance against the Netherlands coming on in the first half for the injured Steven Gerrard and caused the Dutch defence problems throughout the match and earned the man of the match award for his efforts during the match.

He scored his first senior goal for England in his fifth match on 22 March 2013, after coming on for Wayne Rooney in an 8–0 away win against San Marino in World Cup qualification. The goal meant he had made an appearance and scored for all levels of international football for England, from U16 to the seniors, as well as scoring for the Great Britain Olympic football team. On 11 October, he scored another goal in England's qualification campaign, an injury-time penalty in a 4–1 win over Montenegro after he had been fouled by Ivan Kecojević. He scored again in the opening match of 2014, England's March friendly with Denmark. The score was 0–0 until the eighty-second minute, when Sturridge rose to head an Adam Lallana cross into the net for a late winner.

On 2 July 2012, Sturridge was named in Stuart Pearce's 18-man squad for the Great Britain Olympic football team to compete at the 2012 Summer Olympics. It was however, announced on 3 July 2012 that Sturridge was undergoing tests for suspected meningitis, and was possibly going to be unable to compete in the GB 2012 team. However, he made a full recovery meaning he could take part and he scored his first goal for Great Britain in the second group match, a 3–1 victory over the United Arab Emirates. In the final group match, Sturridge scored the only goal as Great Britain defeated Uruguay to finish top of their group and progress to the quarter-final. In the quarter-final match against South Korea, Sturridge missed the fifth penalty for Great Britain. South Korea then scored theirs, knocking out Team GB.

In May 2014, Sturridge was named in England's squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup and assigned the number 9 shirt. He scored the team's opening goal in a 3–0 friendly defeat of Peru at Wembley Stadium on 30 May.

On 14 June, Sturridge started England's opening match of the tournament and scored the team's goal in a 2–1 defeat by Italy in Manaus.

Despite injury keeping him out of most of the UEFA Euro 2016 qualification phase, Sturridge was named in England's squad for the UEFA Euro 2016 finals. In the team's second group match, after appearing as a half time substitute against Wales, Sturridge assisted Jamie Vardy's equaliser and scored the winning goal as the team recovered from a 1–0 deficit.

Former Chelsea manager André Villas-Boas said, "Daniel offers a few of the characteristics I had with Hulk when I was with him in Porto... He is an extremely quick player, and he has technique at pace."

Sturridge said he preferred to play as a centre-forward rather than as a wide player: "I do still see myself as a striker but I am doing a job for the team and I'm enjoying doing it." As Sturridge transitioned from a wider role into a striker when he joined Liverpool, Sturridge also said that he likens himself on striker Thierry Henry, who "played wide for Juventus and then went to Arsenal and played as a centre-forward."

Although he rarely played for Chelsea as a striker, Liverpool manager Brendan Rodgers played Sturridge as a striker in most matches. His ability to still drop between lines and pull wide and attack defences, similar to former strike partner Luis Suárez's playing-style, has led to Rodgers describing him as "what I call a 'nine-and-a-half".

Sturridge is the son of former footballer Mike Sturridge, and the nephew of former footballers Dean and Simon Sturridge. Sturridge used to support Derby County when he was younger because his uncle, Dean, played for them. But once Dean left, Sturridge switched his allegiance to Arsenal.

Sturridge is a Christian. After winning the Premier League Player of the Month award, Sturridge said, "I do all [through] Christ who strengthens me." He is actively involved in charity work, often helping young players get involved in football. In November 2012, while playing for Chelsea, he presented a cheque for €50,000 on behalf of Hyundai to Street League, a charity dedicated to helping disadvantaged players across Europe get into football. In June 2013 he presented a further cheque of £50,000 to Street League, whilst visiting their new centre in Liverpool. Later that same month, Sturridge opened his charity foundation named after him in Portmore, Jamaica, with its aim to help youngsters there get into sport and entertainment. He also owns the Sturr Class Entertainment record company. Sturridge is of Jamaican descent, all of his grandparents being Jamaican.

Sturridge has an endorsement deal with sportswear and equipment supplier Nike. He wears Nike Hypervenom boots. He is an ambassador for BT Sport. Sturridge is featured in EA Sports' "FIFA" video game series, and his signature jig goal celebration appears in "FIFA 14". Prior to the 2014 FIFA World Cup, Sturridge featured in a series of adverts in the UK promoting fast food restaurant Subway.

Chelsea

Liverpool

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="38276520" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38276520" title="Alberto Moreno">
Alberto Moreno

Alberto Moreno Pérez (; born 5 July 1992) is a Spanish professional footballer who plays as a left back for Premier League club Liverpool and the Spain national team.

An academy graduate of local side Sevilla, he made his senior debut for the club's reserve side in 2011 before going on to feature in 62 official games for the first team. During his time with Sevilla, he was part of the squad which won the Europa League title in 2014. The following season, he joined Premier League club Liverpool for a reported fee of £12 million where he has since made over 100 appearances and collected runners-up medals in the EFL Cup, Europa League and Champions League.

Moreno was part of the Spain under-21 team that won the 2013 UEFA European Championship and made his senior debut the same year.

Moreno was born in the Andalusian capital of Seville and at the age of 13 joined his local side, Sevilla. There he progressed through the club's youth academy and made his senior debut for the reserve side, Sevilla Atlético, on 12 June 2011 in a 3–1 home win over Guadalajara in the Segunda División B play-offs. The club ultimately lost 5–4 on aggregate, however. His first full season followed thereafter during which he scored four goals in 30 games, including his first senior goal directly from a corner kick in added time against Cádiz. Whilst playing for the reserve side, Moreno operated under the tutelage of Ramón Tejada who rotated him between attacking and defensive positions down the left-flank of the field. The positional rotation was later credited for his tactical awareness which contributed to him making his first team, and La Liga debut. This took place on 8 April 2012 when he came on as a substitute for Manu del Moral in the last minutes of a 1–0 away loss against Athletic Bilbao.

In February 2013, Moreno was permanently promoted to the first team and he scored his first professional goal on 20 October, netting the second in a 2–2 draw at Real Valladolid. He ultimately made 17 appearances during a campaign blemished only by a straight red card he received following a confrontation with Gabi inn a league match against Atlético Madrid. He enjoyed a breakthrough season in the 2013–14 campaign where he made 44 appearances in total for the club, including 14 in Sevilla's victorious run in the UEFA Europa League. His performances throughout the season also contributed towards Sevilla ending the fifth in the league and earned him a spot in Spain's provisional squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup.

On 12 August 2014, and on the eve of Sevilla's 2014 UEFA Super Cup match against Real Madrid, Moreno was withdrawn from the club's match-day squad after the club agreed a £12 million deal with Premier League side Liverpool for his signature. Following the match, Moreno was in tears and had to be consoled as he was given a send off by the club's fans. He later explained that he was emotional to be leaving Sevilla as the club was the "club of his life" but that he was equally motivated to succeed at Liverpool.

On 16 August 2014, Moreno officially completed his move to Liverpool and he made his debut for the club 10 days later in a 3–1 league loss to Manchester City. He then scored his first goal on 31 August, netting the third goal in 3–0 away win against Tottenham Hotspur after dispossessing Andros Townsend and sprinting 40 yards to score. He scored again in December, against Swansea City, but ultimately endured an inconsistent debut season at Anfield, with his attacking output not matched by his defensive performances.

Moreno spent the first four games of the next season as a substitute as new teammate Joe Gomez started in his position. However, on 20 September 2015, he made his first league start of the season, providing the assist for Danny Ings' first Liverpool goal in a 1–1 draw against Norwich City, and was praised for his man of the match performance. His performance in the 2016 UEFA Europa League Final, where Liverpool lost 1–3 to his former club Sevilla, was heavily criticised by pundits and journalists for positioning and defensive errors.

On 14 August 2016, Moreno started in the first game of the season, a 4–3 win at Arsenal, where he conceded a penalty and was criticised heavily for his performance, prompting a defence from his manager Jürgen Klopp. Despite his manager's intervention, he was dropped and used only as a late substitute for the next game, an 0–2 loss at Burnley. He made 18 appearances over the season, just eight as a starter, as James Milner was preferred in the left-back slot.

In April 2017, Serie A teams AC Milan and Inter Milan spoke to Liverpool about a transfer for Moreno, and in June the Reds rejected a €12.5 million bid for him from another Italian club, Napoli.

Moreno played more frequently at the start of the 2017–18 season, but was criticised in November in a Champions League group game against Sevilla, in which Liverpool led 3–0 at half time but drew 3–3, and was defended by Klopp. He ultimately lost his position to new signing Andrew Robertson for the rest of the season.

Moreno represented the Spanish under-21s at the 2013 UEFA European Championship, being first-choice as he helped them retain their European title. Following the competition's completion he was announced in UEFA's official team of the tournament.

Moreno was called up to the senior team on 4 October 2013 for the last 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifier against Georgia, and he made his debut on 15 October, playing the full 90 minutes in a 2–0 win in Albacete.

Moreno was included in Vicente del Bosque's 30-man provisional list for the tournament in Brazil, but was one of seven players cut from the final squad.

Over three years since his last cap, Moreno was recalled by Julen Lopetegui for friendlies against Costa Rica and Russia in November 2017.

Moreno has many tattoos. In April 2016, he had his leg decorated with an image of a gun-toting chimpanzee dressed in a suit and wearing headphones; ESPN FC's verdict was "Please don't ask, because we haven't got the slightest clue." The back of his leg is decorated with the coordinates of his hometown's Plaza de España. Moreno has two children with his partner Lilia Granadilla.

Sevilla

Liverpool

Spain U21

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="6632765" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6632765" title="Adam Lallana">
Adam Lallana

Adam David Lallana ( ; born 10 May 1988) is an English professional footballer who plays as an attacking midfielder for club Liverpool and the England national team.

Lallana began his youth career with AFC Bournemouth before transferring to Southampton in 2000, where he developed in their academy and became a professional in 2006. After a brief loan back to Bournemouth he broke into Southampton's first team as they earned two promotions from League One to the Premier League, becoming captain in 2012. After two seasons in the top flight and an international breakthrough, he joined Liverpool for a reported £25 million in July 2014.

Since his senior international debut in 2013, Lallana has made over 30 appearances for England and represented them at the 2014 FIFA World Cup and UEFA Euro 2016.

Lallana was born in St Albans in Hertfordshire but moved to the Iford area of Bournemouth when he was five years old. He attended Corpus Christi School followed by St Peter's Catholic Comprehensive School. As a child, Lallana supported Everton, like his father. He is of Spanish descent; his paternal grandfather is from Madrid.

Lallana was a member of the AFC Bournemouth Centre of Excellence, where he was spotted by a talent scout from Southampton. He joined the Premier League club's Saints Academy as a 12-year-old in September 2000. Southampton paid £3,000 compensation to Bournemouth with further payments of £5,000 and £10,000 when he signed scholarship and professional contracts respectively.

Lallana was involved in Southampton's FA Youth Cup squads of and 2005–06, when they reached the final and semi-final respectively.

Lallana joined the first team squad in July 2006, making his debut on 23 August 2006, in a 5–2 victory over Yeovil Town, in the League Cup. On 31 October 2006 he signed a new contract to keep him at Southampton until December 2009. On 9 October 2007 he joined Bournemouth on loan for one month. On 28 April 2008, Lallana scored his first professional goal for Southampton against West Bromwich Albion in a crucial Championship match, with a well-placed finish into the bottom left corner.

He became a regular in the first team at the start of the 2008–09 season. On 29 August 2008, he signed a new three-year deal with the Saints.

He finished the 2009–10 season with a total of twenty goals in all competitions, netting his 20th on the final day of the season against Southend United. This made him the first Southampton midfielder to score twenty goals in a season since Matthew Le Tissier's 30 in the 1994–95 season.

On 7 January 2011, Lallana signed a new contract with Southampton which would expire in the summer of 2015. He was named in the League One PFA Team of the Year for the 2010–11 season after scoring 11 goals that season.

He then scored on the opening day of the 2011–12 season, a 3–1 victory over Leeds United at St Mary's Stadium which broke a 12-year hoodoo of Southampton not winning on the opening day and secured a record-breaking seventh consecutive league win. He then scored twice in a 5–2 victory at Ipswich Town. His 150th start for the club came in a 1–1 draw at south coast rivals Portsmouth. His tenth goal of the season came in a 4–0 victory over Derby County. He then grabbed a brace in a 2–0 victory over Barnsley. He was nominated for the Player of the Year award but lost out to teammate Rickie Lambert. Along with Lambert and Kelvin Davis, he was one of three Southampton players named in the Championship PFA Team of the Year for the 2011–12 season. He scored on the final day of the campaign to finish with 13 goals, 11 of which came in the league.

He made his first Premier League appearance on the opening day of the 2012–13 season, setting up a goal and wearing the captain's armband in a 3–2 defeat against 2011–12 champions Manchester City. He scored his first Premier League goal in a 4–1 defeat away to West Ham United. His second goal of the season came on 25 November, as he opened the scoring in a 2–0 home win against Newcastle United. The 50th goal of his career came in a 2–0 victory at Reading. On 11 April 2013, Lallana signed a new five-year contract with Southampton.

In Southampton's 4–1 Premier League victory over Hull City on 9 November 2013, Lallana started with the ball 30 yards from goal and dribbled his way past five players into the left-hand side of the 18-yard box, before slotting it past Hull goalkeeper Steve Harper. On 18 April 2014, he was named as one of the six players on the shortlist for the PFA Players' Player of the Year award. On 27 April 2014, he was named alongside teammate Luke Shaw in the PFA Team of the Year. On 6 May, he was crowned as both the Southampton Players' Player and Fans' Player of the year.

Prior to the 2014 FIFA World Cup, Lallana was subject to interest from Premier League runners-up Liverpool. After long periods of negotiation Liverpool placed a reported £25 million bid which was accepted by Southampton. Following England's return from the World Cup, Lallana signed for Liverpool, and was handed the number 20 shirt, the number he wore during his time at Southampton. Bournemouth, Lallana's youth team, had originally included a 25% sell-on-clause in his contract when he joined Southampton, but only received £4 million after agreeing to a reduced fee with Southampton.

On 25 July, Liverpool confirmed that Lallana had injured his knee while training with the club in Boston, Massachusetts during pre-season and would be out for six weeks. He therefore missed the start of the league season, which began against former club Southampton. He made his debut in Liverpool's fourth match on 13 September, starting and being substituted for Raheem Sterling after 61 minutes in a 1–0 home defeat to Aston Villa. On 4 October he scored his first goal for the club, opening a 2–1 home win against West Bromwich Albion seconds before half time. Lallana scored his second goal for Liverpool on 2 December during Liverpool's 3–1 win at Leicester City. On 29 December, he continued his fine form and scored two goals in a 4–1 win against Swansea City at Anfield. On 14 February, Lallana scored the winning goal in a FA Cup Fifth Round match against Crystal Palace. On 19 April 2015, Lallana was selected in the Football Manager Team of the Decade at the Football League Awards.

On 17 September 2015, Lallana scored the opening goal in the new Europa League season opening group stage away match against Bordeaux at the Stade Chaban-Delmas, a match Liverpool went on to draw 1–1. On 1 October, Lallana scored in a second match in a row against Sion in the Europa League but the match ended in a 1–1 draw. On 23 January 2016, he came on as a second-half substitute and scored an injury-time winner in Liverpool's 5–4 away win at Norwich City. On 28 February 2016, Lallana came on as a second-half substitute and missed in the penalty shoot-out against Manchester City, resulting in Liverpool's loss in the 2016 League Cup Final. On 3 March 2016, he scored and assisted in Liverpool's 3–0 home win against Manchester City. On 23 April, he scored Liverpool's second goal against Newcastle United, which took the Reds to a 2–0 half-time lead, but the match ended with a 2–2 draw. On 5 May, he scored the third goal in Liverpool's second-leg win over Spanish side Villarreal in the Europa League semi-finals, with the Reds advancing to the final with a 3–1 aggregate win.

On 14 August 2016, during the opening match against Arsenal, Lallana scored Liverpool's second goal, which took the Reds to a 2–1 lead, with the match eventually ending in a 4–3 win for Liverpool. On 10 September, Lallana scored in Liverpool's 4–1 win over the previous season's champions Leicester City. Two weeks later, on 24 September, he scored in Liverpool's 5–1 win over newly-promoted Hull City. On 11 December, he scored Liverpool's opening goal in the mach against West Ham United, which eventually ended in a 2–2 draw. Three days later, he scored twice in a 3–0 defeat of Middlesbrough, and on 27 December, he scored in Liverpool's 4–1 win over Stoke City. On 22 February 2017, Lallana signed a new long-term contract with Liverpool. On 21 May 2017, on the final day of the season, Lallana scored Liverpool's third goal in their 3–0 win over Middlesbrough, which secured a top-four finish for the Reds and qualification to next year's UEFA Champions League.

In August 2017, Lallana suffered a long-term injury during the Audi Cup final against Atlético Madrid, which would keep him out until mid-November. His first appearance of the season was in Liverpool's 1–1 draw with Chelsea, coming on as an 89th minute substitute for Philippe Coutinho. On 31 March, during a match against Crystal Palace, Lallana came on as a substitute in the 65th minute, but only several minutes after playing, he suffered another injury, which kept him out for "a number of weeks". He returned to the squad on 13 May, on the final day of the Premier League season, coming on as a substitute for Sadio Mané in the 74th minute, playing against Brighton & Hove Albion. Liverpool won the match 4–0, which was enough to secure a top-four finish and a place in next year's UEFA Champions League group stages, as finishing in fourth place now meant that clubs in the Premier League will automatically qualify for the group stage, rather than qualifying initially for the play-off round.

On 26 May, during the 2018 UEFA Champions League Final against Real Madrid, Lallana came on as a substitute in the 31st minute for Mohamed Salah, who had left the field in tears after suffering an injury, following a duel with Sergio Ramos. Liverpool would go on lose the final by a scoreline of 3–1. Lallana made only 13 appearances in the 2017–18 season, without scoring.

Lallana played for England Under-18s, scoring on his debut against Slovenia, 18 months after undergoing an operation to correct an irregular heartbeat. He also played once each for England Under-19s and England Under-21s. On 10 September 2012, Lallana was called up to the senior England squad for the first time for the 2014 World Cup qualifying match against Ukraine although he was not selected for the match itself.

On 7 November 2013, along with Southampton teammates Rickie Lambert and fellow uncapped Saint Jay Rodriguez, he was called up to the England team. Lallana won his first cap for England on 15 November by starting a friendly match against Chile at Wembley Stadium. Although England lost 2–0, Lallana's performance received generally favourable reviews. He also started in England's defeat against Germany four days later. He gained his third cap in a 1–0 friendly win against Denmark on 5 March 2014, coming on as a substitute for Jack Wilshere and crossing for Daniel Sturridge to head in the only goal of the match.

On 12 May 2014, Lallana was named in the 23-man England squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup. He made his competitive debut on 14 June in the first group match against Italy, coming on for the last 10 minutes in place of Sturridge who had scored England's goal in the 1–2 defeat.

Lallana scored his first goal for England on 4 September 2016 in a 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification match away to Slovakia at Štadión Antona Malatinského. It came during stoppage time and proved to be England's winning goal of the match. He scored his second England goal on 11 November 2016 in a 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification match against Scotland. The score ended 3–0 to England, with Gary Cahill and Liverpool teammate Daniel Sturridge scoring the other goals.

On 30 January 2017 it was announced that Lallana had won the England Player of the Year Award for 2016 after his performance for the national team.

On 16 May 2018, he was one of five players named on standby for the 23-man England national team squad for the 2018 FIFA World Cup.

Lallana married his fiancée Emily Jubb on 24 December 2013. The couple, who had been dating for seven years, were due to marry on 14 June 2014, which coincided with England's opening World Cup match with Italy. They wed at Poole Register Office in Dorset. Together, they have two sons, Arthur Michael, born on 26 September 2012 and Albie George born on 3 June 2015.

In 2014, Lallana was signed as a French Connection model, to promote their Autumn/Winter collection. He revealed his fashion photo shoot at an interview with "Esquire" magazine.

Southampton

Liverpool

Individual 



</doc>
<doc id="21021360" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21021360" title="Simon Mignolet">
Simon Mignolet

Simon Luc Hildebert Mignolet (, ; born 6 March 1988) is a Belgian professional footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for club Liverpool and the Belgium national team.

Mignolet started his career with Belgian Second Division side Sint-Truiden in 2004, and spent six years with the club, making 100 senior league appearances and scoring a goal. He moved to Premier League side Sunderland in June 2010 for £2 million, spending three years with them and making 101 appearances across all competitions before moving to Liverpool in June 2013 for £9 million.

Mignolet has represented the Belgium national team at every level from under-16 upwards. He made his senior debut in 2011, has since earned over 20 caps. He was also named to Belgium's squad for the 2014 and 2018 FIFA World Cup.

Mignolet was born in Sint-Truiden. He first joined his local football team, Belgian Second Division side Sint-Truiden, in 2004, eventually rising through their youth system to become their first-choice goalkeeper in 2006 at age 18 after the departure of Dušan Belić. In 2009, he made 29 appearances and scored a penalty in the league, as he helped Sint-Truiden to win the Belgian Second Division, and was named Belgian Goalkeeper of the Year the following year after he helped Sint-Truiden avoid relegation.

After being invited for a training ground tour, Mignolet signed a five-year contract with English Premier League club Sunderland on 17 June 2010 in a deal worth £2 million. It was later confirmed by Sint-Truiden that Sunderland had beaten PSV, Twente and Udinese to secure Mignolet's signature.

Mignolet made his Sunderland debut in a 2–2 draw against Birmingham City on 15 August 2010, and was named man of the match for his performance. In the next home match, a 1–0 victory against Manchester City, Mignolet kept his first clean sheet for Sunderland, following an excellent reaction save to deny Emmanuel Adebayor a goal. Mignolet put in another fine performance against Arsenal, as Sunderland drew 1–1 after Darren Bent equalised in the 95th minute. However, Craig Gordon would replace Mignolet in goal several weeks later, and remained first-choice thereafter. Mignolet did not feature again until 8 January 2011, when Sunderland suffered a loss at home to Notts County in the third round of the FA Cup. Mignolet would become first-choice goalkeeper again after a knee injury to Gordon in February, and earned a string of rave reviews for his performances. Following the draw, Sunderland manager Steve Bruce hailed the young goalkeeper's fine start to life in English football. Mignolet cemented his position as first-choice goalkeeper the following season, being preferred to new signing Keiren Westwood. On 29 October 2011, Mignolet was injured during a 2–2 draw with Aston Villa, suffering a broken nose following a collision with Emile Heskey.

Mignolet played every single match of the following season, keeping a large number of clean sheets and producing several man of the match performances. His form prompted Manchester City and England goalkeeper Joe Hart to praise Mignolet in December 2012 as being the best goalkeeper in the league so far that season. On 21 June 2013, it was reported Liverpool had agreed a deal to sign the player for around £9 million.

On 25 June 2013, Mignolet signed with Liverpool for a reported fee of £9 million on a five-year contract. Liverpool manager Brendan Rodgers hailed Mignolet as being "one of the top goalkeepers in the Premier League". On 13 July 2013, he made his unofficial debut for Liverpool in a 4–0 win in a pre-season friendly over Preston North End. On 17 August 2013, Mignolet made his official debut in the 1–0 home win against Stoke City at Anfield. In the 89th minute of the match, he saved a Jonathan Walters penalty, as well as Kenwyne Jones' follow-up shot, to preserve Liverpool's lead and effectively win the match. He then recorded two more clean sheets against Aston Villa and Manchester United, with both matches ending 1–0 in favour of Liverpool. Two weeks later, he conceded his first goals for Liverpool in the Premier League in a 2–2 draw with Swansea City, though he was still named man of the match for the fixture. Mignolet was also named man of the match in the 3–3 draw with Everton, making nine saves throughout the match.
On 14 December 2014, Mignolet's run of 53 consecutive Premier League starts came to an end as he was replaced by Brad Jones in the starting 11 against Manchester United, with Brendan Rodgers saying Mignolet would be dropped for an "indefinite period". However, 12 days later, Jones went off injured after 16 minutes away at Burnley, and despite some errors, Mignolet kept a clean sheet in a 1–0 victory. After this match, Mignolet kept four consecutive clean sheets against Sunderland, Aston Villa, West Ham United and Everton respectively. On 10 February, Mignolet made some outstanding saves against Tottenham Hotspur in a 3–2 win. On 16 March, Mignolet continued his resurgence in a 1–0 victory against Swansea, keeping a clean sheet as part of a strong performance. On 22 March, he saved a penalty taken by Wayne Rooney in a 2–1 defeat against Manchester United.

On 18 January 2016, Mignolet signed new five-year deal with the club. Eight days later, he saved a penalty from Stoke City's Peter Crouch and Marc Muniesa in a penalty shoot-out to send Liverpool to the 2016 Football League Cup Final at Wembley Stadium.

Although he started the first five matches of the season, Liverpool manager Jürgen Klopp dropped Mignolet in favor of new signing Loris Karius on 24 September 2016 for the match against Hull City. On 24 October 2016, Klopp confirmed Mignolet was no longer Liverpool's first-choice goalkeeper and that he will be given cup matches instead. However, Mignolet returned to the starting lineup for the team in Premier League in December 2016. On 23 September 2017, Mignolet saved his club-record 8th penalty, preserving a 3–2 victory over Leicester City. On 4 November, Mignolet captained Liverpool for the first time in a 4-1 win against West Ham United. On 26 December, Mignolet and teammate Philippe Coutinho both made their 200th appearances for Liverpool in a 5–0 Premier League win over Swansea.

Mignolet first represented the Belgian under-21 side in 2008, and went on to make ten appearances for the side. On 1 September 2010, he won his first call up to the Belgian senior squad after a good run of form for Sunderland. He made his full international debut in a 2–0 victory over Austria on 25 March 2011 in a UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying match. He remained in the starting line-up for each of the four remaining qualifying matches, in addition to playing in three friendly matches during the qualifying campaign. However, he was unable to help Belgium qualify for the Euro 2012 finals, as a 3–1 defeat against Germany saw them finish third in their qualifying group.

Mignolet played in two further friendly internationals during the 2011–12 season, starting against Greece and England. However, following the match against England, he did not play an international match for four months, with Thibaut Courtois being preferred instead. He returned to the starting lineup on 14 November 2012 in a 1–2 friendly loss over Romania. His next international match came over six months later in a 4–2 friendly victory over the United States on 29 May 2013.

Mignolet served as back-up goalkeeper during the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification campaign, with Courtois playing every minute as Belgium qualified for its first major tournament since the 2002 World Cup.

On 10 October 2015, Mignolet started for an injured Courtois in Belgium's last two Euro 2016 qualifying matches: a 4–1 win over Andorra and a 3–1 victory over Israel, helping seal Belgium's qualification for the first time since co-hosting Euro 2000.

In May 2018 he was named in Belgium’s preliminary squad for the 2018 World Cup in Russia, and later appeared on their 24-man squad as a goalkeeper together with Thibaut Courtois and Koen Casteels.

Mignolet can speak English, French, Dutch and German. He has a degree in political science from the Catholic University of Leuven. On 20 June 2015, Mignolet married his girlfriend Jasmien Claes in his hometown.

Sint-Truiden

Liverpool

Belgium

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="23598923" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23598923" title="Xherdan Shaqiri">
Xherdan Shaqiri

Xherdan Shaqiri (; born 10 October 1991) is a Swiss professional footballer who plays as a winger for Premier League club Liverpool and the Swiss national team.

He began his career at FC Basel, winning honours including three Swiss Super League titles, before moving to Bayern Munich, where he gained eight domestic and international honours despite playing less frequently. In January 2015, he moved to Inter Milan for a fee of €15 million, and seven months later to Stoke City for a club record £12 million. After Stoke's relegation from the Premier League in 2018, Shaqiri was transferred to Liverpool prior to the following season for a reported £13.5 million fee.

A full international since 2010, Shaqiri has earned over 70 caps and scored over 20 goals for Switzerland. He represented the nation at the 2010, 2014 and 2018 FIFA World Cups, as well as UEFA Euro 2016.

Shaqiri was born in Gjilan, SFR Yugoslavia, to Kosovar Albanian parents. He emigrated to Switzerland in 1992 with his parents and three siblings. They settled in Augst, a small town in the canton of Basel-Country, near the French and German borders.

His father did not speak Swiss German, so he had to start out washing dishes in a restaurant, before working construction on roads. His mother worked as a cleaner in office buildings in the city, which he and his brothers helped with. His father would send as much money back to Kosovo to other family members as he could, meaning Xherdan and the family did not have extra spending money, except for birthdays. He idolized Brazilian striker Ronaldo, who he said played "like magic".

Shaqiri started his career at hometown club SV Augst, and at the age of eight he was scouted by FC Basel. Whilst playing for Basel's youth team, he competed in the Under-15 Nike Cup 2007 and was named the best player of the tournament. Despite having several other clubs attempting to sign him, he decided to stay with Basel, where he played for their reserve team from 2007 to 2009 in the Swiss 1. Liga. Two years later, Shaqiri signed his first professional contract with Basel on 2 January 2009, with the new contract keeping him at St. Jakob-Park until June 2014.

Shaqiri made his Basel club debut as a substitute on 12 July 2009 in Basel's 2009–10 season opening match against FC St. Gallen at the AFG Arena. Four months later he scored his first goal for Basel in a 4–1 win over Neuchâtel Xamax at home on 9 November 2009. At the end of the 2009–10 season Shaqiri won the national Double with Basel, and a year later won the League title again.

In December 2011, Shaqiri provided two assists in a match against Manchester United, with Basel winning 2–1. At the end of the 2011–12 season, for the second time in his Basel stint, he won the Double, consisting of the League title, and the Swiss Cup.

On 9 February 2012, Basel announced that Shaqiri had accepted a transfer to German club Bayern Munich of the Bundesliga for the 2012–13 season. The transfer fee was a reported €11.6 million, with Shaqiri signing a four-year contract with the German club which would last until 30 June 2016, and which paid him around €2 million per season. He faced competition for a place in the midfield from established internationals Franck Ribéry, Arjen Robben, Toni Kroos and Thomas Müller.

On 10 July 2012, Shaqiri made his debut in a 1–0 friendly win against Bavarian neighbours SpVgg Unterhaching. His first competitive appearance for the club came on 20 August in a DFB-Pokal match at SSV Jahn Regensburg, as a half-time substitute. He scored Bayern's second goal as well as providing assists for Mario Mandžukić and Claudio Pizarro, with Bayern winning 4–0. He helped Bayern secure the top spot in their Champions League group by scoring a goal and providing assists in a 4–1 defeat of BATE Borisov on 5 December, winning the Man of the Match award and avenging their defeat in Minsk.

Shaqiri did not score his first Bundesliga goal until the final league match of the 2012 calendar year, rescuing a point for them in a 1–1 draw with Borussia Mönchengladbach, leaving Bayern in first place at the winter break. On 16 April 2013, Shaqiri also scored in the DFB-Pokal semi-final against VfL Wolfsburg with a long-range shot. Although he did not play in the final, Shaqiri won the 2012–13 UEFA Champions League title with Bayern, as well as the Bundesliga and the DFB-Pokal title, making him one of the Bayern Munich players to have won the first treble in club history; he added the UEFA Super Cup and FIFA Club World Cup to his achievements that year. By June 2014, Shaqiri was reported to be the most decorated Swiss footballer of all time at just 22, with 13 medals to his name.

Shaqiri transferred to Italian club Inter Milan on 9 January 2015 for €15 million, signing a four-and-a-half-year contract, though English club Stoke City had previously declared an interest in signing him. With his previous number of 23 being taken by Andrea Ranocchia, Shaqiri chose the number 91 for his Inter shirt, representing his birth year. He was an unused substitute in Inter's 3–1 victory over Genoa at San Siro. He made his debut for Inter on 17 January, playing in the last 16 minutes as a substitute for fellow new signing Lukas Podolski. Shaqiri made his Coppa Italia debut in a match against Sampdoria in the round of 16 on 22 January, scoring the first goal of the match and helping the team to a 2–0 win to progress into the quarter-finals.

Shaqiri scored his first Serie A goal on 15 February 2015 in a 4–1 away win against Atalanta. Four days later, he registered his first European tournament goal for Inter, scoring the opener from a Zdravko Kuzmanović assist in a 3–3 UEFA Europa League draw away to Celtic.

In July 2015, Stoke agreed a £12 million fee to sign Shaqiri, but the deal fell through when he did not agree to the move before a deadline imposed by the club. The deal was revived a month later, however, with Shaqiri agreeing to personal terms and undergoing medicals. Everton had also expressed interest in him but only wanted a loan deal, while Inter preferred a permanent move. On 11 August, Shaqiri completed his move to Stoke for a club-record fee of £12 million (€14.5 million), on a five-year deal.

He made his debut eleven days later in a 1–1 draw with Norwich City at Carrow Road, assisting Mame Biram Diouf's headed goal with a free kick. On 28 December, Shaqiri recorded his first goals for Stoke, a first-half brace in a 4–3 win at Everton. The second of these two goals was a half-volley over Tim Howard, from Bojan's pass. His only other goal in 2015–16 was a 20-yard strike against Newcastle United on 2 March 2016. In total Shaqiri played 32 times for Stoke in 2015–16 as the side finished in ninth position.

Shaqiri scored a 20-yard free kick against Middlesbrough on the opening day of the 2016–17 season. However a calf injury ruled him out for the next six weeks, returning to the side on 24 September 2016 against West Bromwich Albion where he provided the assist for Joe Allen in a 1–1 draw. Shaqiri scored two long-range goals against Hull City on 22 October 2016, becoming the first Stoke player to do so in a Premier League game. He scored another long range strike also against Hull on 15 April 2017 which was named as Stoke's goal of the season. Shaqiri made 22 appearances in 2016–17, as Stoke finished in 13th position.

Shaqiri scored his first goal of the 2017–18 season in the match against Newcastle United, on 16 September, scoring the equalizing goal in an eventual 1–2 defeat. On 4 November, he scored in a 2–2 draw against Leicester City. On 25 November, he scored in a 1–2 defeat to Crystal Palace. On 2 December, he scored in a 2–1 win over Swansea City. On 3 February 2018, he scored the opening goal in a 1–2 defeat to Bournemouth. A week later, on 10 February, he scored in a 1–1 draw against Brighton & Hove Albion. On 24 February, Shaqiri scored for a third consecutive game in a 1–1 draw against Leicester City. In March 2018, with Stoke battling against relegation, Shaqiri courted controversy with an interview for Swiss magazine "Schweizer Illustrierte" in which he said there was a "lack of quality" in his Stoke teammates and that even the presence of Ronaldinho would not improve the team. On 5 May, Shaqiri scored in a 1–2 defeat to Crystal Palace, as Stoke suffered relegation to the EFL Championship. He played 38 times for the club in the season and finished as top goalscorer for the club with 8 goals, also providing 7 assists.

On 13 July 2018, Liverpool signed Shaqiri on a five-year deal after triggering his £13.5 million release clause.

He made his unofficial debut for the club on 29 July, in a pre-season friendly game against rivals Manchester United and scored from a bicycle kick in a 4–1 win. On his competitive debut on 12 August, in the opening match of the season against West Ham United, he came on as a late substitute in a 4–0 win. He made his first full start on 22 September, in a 3–0 win over Southampton, and received praise for his performance which earned him the BBC Sport Man of the Match award.

Shaqiri scored his first goal for Liverpool on 27 October, scoring the third goal in a 4–1 win over Cardiff City. In November, he was left out of the club's Champions League trip to Red Star Belgrade in Serbia to avoid controversy over his pro-Albanian views. The following month, during the North West derby, Shaqiri scored twice after coming on as a substitute to guide Liverpool to a 3–1 win which saw the club record a league victory over Manchester United for the first time since March 2014.

Shaqiri made his debut for the Swiss under-21s side on 11 November 2009 in a 3–1 win against the Turkish under-21 side in a 2011 UEFA European Under-21 Championship qualifier. He scored his first goal for them on 11 June 2011 in the 2011 Under-21 Championship opening game against the Danish under-21 team.

Shaqiri was promoted to the Swiss senior team in 2010, making his debut on 3 March 2010 in a 3–1 friendly loss against Uruguay. He was included in the 2010 World Cup squad, after receiving a surprise call-up from manager Ottmar Hitzfeld. Shaqiri scored his first goal for them on 7 September 2010, a long range left-footed shot, in a 1–3 loss against England in a Euro 2012 qualifier. He netted a hat-trick in another Euro 2012 qualifier on 6 September 2011, as Switzerland came from behind to beat Bulgaria 3–1. Switzerland also tried to select him to participate in the 2012 Olympic Football tournament, but he opted to stay at his new club for pre-season training.

On 11 September 2012, Shaqiri did not sing the Swiss national anthem in a World Cup qualifier against his ancestral Albania in Lucerne, and did not celebrate when he scored the opening goal of a 2–0 win. He wore boots with the flags of Kosovo, Albania and Switzerland for the match.

In June 2014, Shaqiri was named in Switzerland's squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup. In the team's opening match, Shaqiri was named man of the match by FIFA as the "Nati" defeated Ecuador. He earned the same title a mere ten days later in the Swiss team's third and final group match, scoring a hat-trick against Honduras, which included a bending strike from 30 yards, to ensure Switzerland a spot in the round of 16, where they 1–0 lost to Argentina.

Shaqiri scored three times in the Swiss team's successful qualification campaign for UEFA Euro 2016, with all of his strikes coming against Lithuania. He recorded a brace on 15 November 2014 in a 4–0 win over them in St. Gallen, and in the reverse fixture the following 14 June, he netted an 84th-minute winner in a 2–1 victory. In the final tournament in France, he started all four of Switzerland's matches as they reached the last 16, equalising with a bicycle kick from the edge of the penalty area as they drew 1–1 with Poland in Saint-Étienne; he scored again in the penalty shootout but the Poles won nonetheless.

Following Switzerland's first game at Euro 2016, Shaqiri declared he would switch allegiance to Kosovo if their manager would make him captain, in reaction to Swiss manager Vladimir Petković's decision to omit him from that position. Although already an international for the Swiss, FIFA rules would permit Shaqiri to represent Kosovo, who joined the federation earlier that year. However, since Shaqiri continued to play for Switzerland after Kosovo had become a member of FIFA, it also ruled out the possibility of Shaqiri's eligibility to Kosovo.

Shaqiri was included in Switzerland's 23-man squad for the 2018 FIFA World Cup, held in Russia. In the group stage, he scored the winning goal as the Swiss came from behind to defeat Serbia 2–1. He and fellow goalscorer Granit Xhaka, who is also of Kosovar descent, celebrated their goals by making an eagle gesture, a symbol of ethnic Albanians. Swiss captain Stephan Lichtsteiner, who is not of Albanian origin, did the same gesture to celebrate Shaqiri's goal, and defended both players after the match. FIFA fined Xhaka and Shaqiri 10,000 Swiss francs "for unsporting behaviour contrary to the principles of fair-play", while Lichtsteiner paid 5,000 Swiss francs. Additionally, with the goal he equalled Stéphane Chapuisat's tally of 21 in internationals and entered Switzerland's top ten scorers of all time.

Shaqiri plays as a right winger and FIFA's official website describes him as "unpredictable on the ball, adept with both feet, clinical in front of goal and possessing excellent vision." He was described in "The Daily Telegraph" as "stocky and powerful" with a "wand of a left foot." He is nicknamed "the Alpine Messi" and "the magic dwarf".

Shaqiri is a Muslim. Shaqiri was chosen to be on the cover of the "FIFA" video game "FIFA 15" in Switzerland next to Lionel Messi. Shaqiri is sponsored by sportswear and equipment supplier Nike. He wears Nike Mercurial Vapor boots, and at the 2018 World Cup he had the flags of Switzerland and Kosovo embroidered on each heel.

Basel

Bayern Munich




</doc>
<doc id="55634171" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55634171" title="Rhian Brewster">
Rhian Brewster

Rhian Joel Brewster (born 1 April 2000) is an English professional footballer who plays as a striker for Premier League club Liverpool and the England U18 national team. In 2017, he was part of the England squad which won the 2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup and was awarded the Golden Boot award for ending as the competition's leading goalscorer.

Born and raised in the London area, Brewster attended school at Chadwell Heath Primary School before joining the Chadwell Heath and Shield Football academies. At the age of seven, he was scouted by representatives from Chelsea, Arsenal, West Ham and Charlton. He ultimately joined Chelsea where he developed his game under coach Michael Beale in the club's academy until the age of 14, whereafter he left to join Premier League rivals Liverpool.

In 2015, Liverpool signed Brewster from Chelsea following a recommendation by Beale who had taken up a position with the club. Brewster's decision to make the move was motivated in part by his father's influence who believed that he had a better chance of breaking through to the first team through Liverpool's academy than Chelsea's. He initially joined the club's U18 side before being promoted to the U23 squad, where he scored on his debut against Ipswich Town. During his time with the club's academy, Brewster was placed on a special training regime which included one-on-one sessions with former Liverpool and Real Madrid winger, Steve McManaman.

Brewster was then called up by manager Jürgen Klopp to the first-team for club friendlies in October and November 2016 during which he scored a hat-trick against Accrington Stanley. Later that season, he was named on the bench for Liverpool's Premier League game against Crystal Palace on 23 April 2017, but remained an unused substitute. The following season, during Liverpool's UEFA Youth League match against Spartak Moscow, Brewster was the victim of alleged racist comments from Spartak's captain, Leonid Mironov. An investigation into the incident was opened by UEFA after the match and Brewster later said in an interview with "The Guardian" that it had been the seventh such instance he had experienced, including once before against the same opposition.<nowiki></nowiki> UEFA later ruled that there was insufficient evidence to take further action against Mironov.

On 12 January 2018, during an U23 match against Manchester City, Brewster received oxygen and had to be stretchered off the field after landing awkwardly following an aerial challenge. He was later diagnosed with a high ankle sprain and related ligament damage and was ruled out for the remainder of the season. In March, he had to undergo a second operation in order to repair damage to his knee which he sustained during the same incident.
Towards the end of the season, Brewster was the subject of intense transfer speculation which culminated in Liverpool cancelling a scheduled friendly against Borussia Mönchengladbach after the German club were alleged to have tapped him up.

In June 2018, he signed a five-year professional contract with Liverpool.

Brewster is an England youth international and has represented the nation at various youth levels but remains eligible to play for Turkey and Cyprus as his mother is Turkish Cypriot. 

Having previously represented England at U16 level, Brewster scored six goals in five appearances for England U17 in 2016, including a hat-trick against Croatia and a brace against Germany. He then led the nation's attack at 2017 UEFA European Under-17 Championship and featured in the final against Spain. England ultimately lost on penalties with Brewster one of the players who missed his spot-kick. He ended the tournament with a return of three goals in six appearances.

Later that year, Brewster gained widespread press attention after scoring successive hat-tricks against the USA and Brazil in the quarter-final and semi-finals of the 2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup. He then scored England's opening goal in the final as the team overcame Spain 5–2 to claim the trophy. Brewster's return of eight goals for the tournament saw him win the Golden Boot award for the top scorer and he was also awarded the Bronze Ball for his individual performances. In December 2017, Brewster revealed in an interview with "The Guardian" that his teammate Morgan Gibbs-White was racially abused by a Spanish player during the match with the FA reporting the incident to FIFA.

England U17

Individual


</doc>
<doc id="40159932" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40159932" title="Andrew Robertson">
Andrew Robertson

Andrew Robertson (born 11 March 1994) is a Scottish professional footballer who plays as a left back for Premier League club Liverpool and captains the Scotland national team.

Robertson began his senior career with Queen's Park in 2012 before joining Dundee United a year later. His form in his first season as a professional led to him being named SPFA Young Player of the Year and also making his international debut. He joined Hull City in July 2014 for a fee of £2.85 million, before joining Liverpool in July 2017 for an undisclosed fee, believed to be an initial £8 million. 

Robertson made his full international debut for Scotland in May 2014, and he was appointed Scotland captain in September 2018.

Robertson was born in Glasgow. He attended St Ninian's High School in Giffnock, East Renfrewshire, from 2006 to 2012, where he captained the football team. He also played for Giffnock Soccer Centre and joined Celtic as a youth, but was released at under-15 level because he was considered to be too small. He then signed for Queen's Park.

Focusing on his studies, Robertson was on the brink of starting university at undergraduate degree level before he was called up to the Queen's Park first team at the beginning of the 2012–13 season. He made his debut for the club in the Scottish Challenge Cup, in a penalty shoot out win against Berwick Rangers. He went on to make a total of forty appearances during the season, helping the club to a third-place finish in the Scottish Third Division. His first goal for the club came in a 2–1 defeat to East Stirlingshire on 13 November 2012.

Robertson signed for Scottish Premiership side Dundee United, along with Queen's Park teammate Aidan Connolly, on 3 June 2013; he took the squad place of the departing Barry Douglas who had made the same move three years earlier. Having being ignored in their requests for a transfer fee for Douglas, Queen's Park (an amateur club) protested at the prospect of more players departing to United for nothing and eventually agreed a deal involving a percentage of future transfers, which would later prove beneficial.

Robertson immediately became part of manager Jackie McNamara's first team plans, making his debut for the club on the opening day of the season in a 0–0 draw with Partick Thistle. On 22 September 2013, Robertson scored his first goal for Dundee United, in a 2–2 draw against Motherwell. He ran from his own half before sending a low left-foot drive in to the goal from 22 yards. Soon afterwards he agreed a new contract with United, until May 2016. He was voted SPFL young player of the month for September 2013 and player of the month for November 2013. On 12 April 2014, Robertson played in the Scottish Cup Semi-final against Rangers at Ibrox, which United won 3–1. In April 2014, Robertson won the PFA Scotland Young Player of the Year award and was also named in the PFA Scotland Team of the Year for the 2013–14 Scottish Premiership.

In July 2014, Dundee United accepted an offer of £2.85 million for Robertson from English Premier League club Hull City. The transfer was completed on 29 July, as Robertson signed a three-year contract with Hull. He made his competitive debut on the opening day of the season in a 1–0 victory away to QPR. Robertson quickly settled at Hull and established himself in the side, winning the club's Player of the Month award for August 2014. His first goal for City came on 3 November 2015 away to Brentford where he opened the scoring in a 2–0 win to put Hull top of the table on goal difference. Robertson started the 2016 Championship Play-off Final against Sheffield Wednesday, which Hull won 1–0 to secure promotion to the Premier League.

On 21 July 2017, Robertson signed a long-term deal with Liverpool for an initial fee of £8 million. On 19 August, he made his debut in a 1–0 win over Crystal Palace. Robertson started the 2017–18 season as understudy to Alberto Moreno, but got a run of games when the Spaniard was injured in December. His performance in the 4–3 victory against league leaders Manchester City on 14 January earned praise from the Liverpool supporters. He scored his first goal for the club on the final match day of the 2017–18 season against Brighton in a 4–0 victory.

Robertson continued to play regularly for Liverpool during the 2018–19 season. He signed a new contract with the club in January 2019, which is due to run until 2024. He has been hailed as the best left back in the Premier League by Kevin Kilbane and the best in the world by Phil Neville.

Robertson was first selected by the Scotland under-21 team in October 2013. He made his debut as a substitute in a 2–1 win against Slovakia. 
Robertson was selected for the under-21 team in November 2015, as the full national team did not have a fixture.

Robertson was first named in the full Scotland squad for a friendly against Poland on 5 March 2014. He came on as a substitute in the second half, as Scotland won 1–0 in Warsaw. Scotland manager Gordon Strachan said afterwards "Andy came on there and the first time he picked it up he drove about 30 yards. I thought 'that's fantastic'. Absolutely no grey area, I'm going to do what I do. I loved seeing that first touch." Robertson made his first start for the national team in a 2–2 draw with Nigeria on 28 May 2014.

Robertson scored his first international goal in a friendly against England at Celtic Park in November 2014, scoring Scotland's only goal as they were beaten 3–1.

On 3 September 2018, Robertson was appointed as Scotland captain by manager Alex McLeish. After a 2–1 defeat against Israel in October 2018, Robertson said that both he and fellow left-back Kieran Tierney were being played out of position in the 3–5–2 system adopted by Alex McLeish to accommodate both players.

Robertson is engaged to his girlfriend, Rachel Roberts. Roberts gave birth to their son, Rocco, on 26 August 2017. In January 2019, Roberts gave birth to their second child, Aria.

In March 2018, Robertson donated a signed Liverpool shirt of his teammate Roberto Firmino to a young boy who had given his pocket money to a local food bank.

Dundee United

Hull City

Liverpool

Individual


</doc>
<doc id="38432191" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38432191" title="Divock Origi">
Divock Origi

Divock Okoth Origi (; born 18 April 1995) is a Belgian professional footballer who plays as a forward for Liverpool and the Belgium national team. He is the son of former Kenyan professional footballer Mike Origi.

Origi began his career at Lille, and scored on his professional debut for them in 2013. A year and a half later, he was signed for £10 million by Liverpool, who loaned him back to Lille for the 2014–15 Ligue 1 season.

Origi made his international debut for Belgium in 2014, and was part of their team which reached the quarter-finals of the 2014 FIFA World Cup, during which he became the youngest goalscorer in Belgian World Cup history.

Origi began his career playing football at Genk's youth academy where he spent nine years before signing for Lille in May 2010, aged 15, after turning down an approach by Manchester United.

On 24 January 2013, Origi was an unused substitute in Lille's 3–1 away win over Plabennec in a 2012–13 Coupe de France match. Nine days later, he scored on his competitive debut for the senior Lille side, coming on as a substitute in the 69th minute for Ronny Rodelin and scoring to bring his side from 1–0 down against Troyes.

On 29 July 2014, Premier League club Liverpool announced that they had completed a £10 million transfer for Origi, who signed a five-year contract but was immediately loaned back to Lille for the 2014–15 season.

In his first match back in Lille, Origi scored his first goal of the new Ligue 1 season through a penalty against Caen to secure a 1–0 win for his side. This was after he had been brought down in the box by defender Dennis Appiah, who was sent off by the referee towards the 70th minute.

On 11 December 2014, as Lille lost 0–3 at home to VfL Wolfsburg to be eliminated from the UEFA Europa League group stage, Origi had a penalty saved by Diego Benaglio. On 15 March 2015, Origi scored a hat-trick for Lille in a 3–0 league win against Rennes.

On 11 July 2015, Origi was named in Liverpool's 30-man squad for their pre-season tour of Thailand, Australia and Malaysia. In his non-competitive debut for Liverpool, a pre-season friendly against Thai All-Stars on 14 July, Origi scored his first goal for the club in a 4–0 win.

His first competitive game for the team was on 12 September, replacing Danny Ings for the final sixteen minutes of a 3–1 loss at rivals Manchester United. Origi scored his first competitive Liverpool goals on 2 December, a hat-trick in a 6–1 away win over Southampton in the quarter-finals of the League Cup. Eleven days later, he scored his first Premier League goal, replacing the injured Dejan Lovren in the 79th minute and scoring an added-time equaliser from outside the penalty area for a 2–2 draw against West Bromwich Albion at Anfield. On 14 February, he scored his second league goal against Aston Villa in a 6–0 victory, only 27 seconds after replacing Daniel Sturridge in the second half; this was the fastest goal scored by a substitute that season.

On 7 April 2016, Liverpool manager Jürgen Klopp surprisingly started Origi ahead of Sturridge (the team's first-choice striker) during Liverpool's Europa League quarter-final match against Borussia Dortmund, Klopp's former side. Origi scored a vital away goal in the 1–1 draw. Three days later, he scored two goals in a 4–1 win over Stoke City after coming on as a substitute to replace Sheyi Ojo at half-time.

Origi was used predominantly as a substitute and cup player at the start of the 2016–17 campaign. He scored his first goal of the season on 23 August 2016 in a 5–0 EFL Cup win over Burton Albion. He scored his first 2016–17 Premier League goal on 26 November, coming off the bench for the injured Philippe Coutinho to score the opener in a 2–0 win over Sunderland.

On 31 August 2017, Bundesliga club VfL Wolfsburg announced the signing of Origi on a season-long loan deal.

On 2 December, Origi scored his first goal of the season in a derby match against city rivals Everton, which Liverpool won 1–0. Origi came on as a substitute for Roberto Firmino in the 84th minute and scored with a header in the 96th minute, capitalising on an error from Everton goalkeeper Jordan Pickford.

Origi has represented Belgium at under-15, under-16, under-17, under-19 and under-21 level. He scored ten goals while in the under-19 team, the first in a 2013 UEFA European Under-19 Championship qualification match against Belarus on 12 October 2012.

The Football Kenya Federation expressed an interest in persuading Origi to play for the Kenya senior national team in the future. However, on 13 May 2014, Belgium senior national team manager Marc Wilmots announced Origi would be part of the 23-man squad representing Belgium at the 2014 FIFA World Cup.

Origi came on as a substitute for Romelu Lukaku in the 58th minute of the opening Group H game against Algeria in Belo Horizonte on 17 June. In Belgium's second match, again after coming on as a substitute for Lukaku, he scored his first senior international goal in the 88th minute of a 1–0 win over Russia to qualify the "Red Devils" for the knockout stage. In so doing, at 19 years, 2 months and 4 days, he became the youngest goalscorer of the tournament (until American winger Julian Green scored against Belgium during their round of 16 match), the youngest goalscorer in Belgian World Cup history, and the first player of Kenyan origin to score at a World Cup finals. For his performances, he was named the Young Talent of the 2014 Belgian Sportsman of the year awards.

Origi scored once in Belgium's successful UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying campaign, in a 6–0 home win over Andorra on 10 October 2014. He was included in the squad for the final tournament, but missed out on the 2018 FIFA World Cup.

Origi was born in Ostend and grew up in Houthalen-Oost. He was born into a family of footballers. His father, Mike Origi, played for KV Oostende (at the time Divock was born) and Genk, among other Belgian clubs, as well as the Kenya national team. His uncle, Austin Oduor, played for Gor Mahia in the Kenyan Premier League while his other uncles, Gerald and Anthony, played for Tusker. His cousin Arnold currently plays for Lillestrøm in the Norwegian Tippeligaen and the Kenya national team as a goalkeeper. The Origi family is of Kenyan Luo ethnicity.

On 25 June 2014, a baby dolphin at the Boudewijn Seapark in Bruges was baptised "Origi" in Divock Origi's honour after having scored the winning goal against Russia during Belgium's group stage match at the 2014 World Cup.




</doc>
<doc id="24998899" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24998899" title="Joël Matip">
Joël Matip

Job Joël André Matip (born 8 August 1991) is a professional footballer who plays as a centre back for Premier League club Liverpool and the Cameroon national team.

He began his professional career with Schalke 04 in 2009, and was part of their teams that won the DFB-Pokal and DFL-Supercup in 2011. He totalled 258 competitive appearances and 23 goals before moving to Liverpool on a free transfer in 2016. 

Born and raised in Germany, he represented his father's Cameroon at international level and played for them at the 2010 Africa Cup of Nations and the FIFA World Cups of 2010 and 2014.

Born in Bochum, Matip began his career with SC Weitmar 45 before joining VfL Bochum in 1997. After three years in VfL Bochum's youth teams, Matip was scouted by Schalke 04 in July 2000.

Matip made his professional debut on 17 October 2009 in a Regionalliga against 1. FC Saarbrücken. He made his Bundesliga debut for Schalke on 7 November 2009 against Bayern Munich, in which he scored the game-tying goal and was subsequently named man of the match.

On 2 March 2010, Matip signed a three-and-a-half-year contract with Schalke 04.

In January 2012, Schalke announced that Matip signed a two-year contract extension running until 30 June 2016.

On 23 February 2013, Matip scored both goals as Schalke recorded an important 2–1 victory over Fortuna Düsseldorf, securing the club's second win in 12 games.

On 15 February 2016, Matip announced signing a four-year pre-contract agreement to join Liverpool on a free transfer, following the expiration of his contract with Schalke.

On 1 July 2016, Matip officially became a Liverpool player, taking the shirt number 32, whilst Cameron Brannagan, who previously wore 32 took number 25.

Matip made his debut for Liverpool on 23 August 2016 against Burton Albion in the League Cup in a 5–0 win for the Reds. He scored his first goal for the club in a 4–2 Premier League win over Crystal Palace at Selhurst Park on 29 October. Matip was voted as Standard Chartered Player of the Month for his performances in November.

Matip was withdrawn from the fixture against Manchester United on 15 January 2017, as Liverpool were yet to get full clarity from FIFA over his eligibility, and also as a result of the Cameroon Football Federation failing to confirm that Matip can therefore play club football during the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations. Overall, Matip was considered as a key player to improving Liverpool's defence, which had received extreme criticism prior to the season, during the 2016–17 season.

On 1 October 2017, Matip was criticized for his poor performance against Newcastle United, being deemed at fault for Newcastle's goal. On 4 November, Matip scored his first goal of the 2017–18 season, scoring in a 4–1 win over West Ham United at the London Stadium. On 27 January 2018, Matip scored an own goal in a 2–3 home defeat to West Bromwich Albion in the fourth round of the FA Cup. On 31 March, during the match against Crystal Palace, Matip suffered a thigh injury. On 3 April, Liverpool announced that he would have to undergo surgery to fix it, and that he will miss the rest of the season.

Matip suffered another muscle injury in July 2018 during a tour of the United States, but recovered to be named an unused substitute in a 2–0 away win over Crystal Palace on 20 August.

Matip was called up on 23 December 2009 by Cameroon for the 2010 Africa Cup of Nations but he later declined to take part in the tournament. It was not yet clear if Matip would represent Cameroon in the future as the German Football Association still hoped that he might represent his country of birth instead.

On 2 March 2010, aged 18, Matip opted to play his international football for Cameroon, after meeting up with the national team ahead of a friendly against Italy on 3 March 2010. He made his first appearance in the match against Italy and went on to play in the 2010 FIFA World Cup for Cameroon.

He was part of the Cameroon national football team for the 2014 FIFA World Cup where he played twice and scored against the host team Brazil. In January 2017, Matip was selected for the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations but rejected the call-up.

Matip was born to a German mother and former Cameroonian footballer Jean Matip. He is the brother of the fellow Cameroon international Marvin Matip and is a cousin of Joseph-Désiré Job. He attended the Gesamtschule Berger Feld. 

Schalke 04



</doc>
<doc id="58243051" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58243051" title="Nathaniel Phillips">
Nathaniel Phillips

Nathaniel Phillips (born 21 March 1997), is an English professional footballer who plays for Liverpool, as a defender.

Phillips joined Liverpool ahead of the 2016–17 season on a free transfer from Bolton Wanderers. He missed a large part of the 2017–18 season due to a back injury. He captains the Liverpool U23 squad, and was promoted to the first team squad for the 2018–19 season. He is yet to play in a senior game.


</doc>
<doc id="2206759" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2206759" title="Curtis Jones">
Curtis Jones

Curtis Alan Jones (born April 26, 1967) is an American singer, songwriter and record producer. His style of house and techno music has been compared to and inspired by the likes of Kraftwerk, Prince, Gary Numan, and Nitzer Ebb.

Jones is also known as Cajmere, Geo Vogt, Green Velvet, Half Pint, Curan Stone, and Gino Vittori.

Before becoming a professional musician, Jones studied chemical engineering at the University of Illinois. In 1991, he left a Master's program at UC-Berkeley to move back to Chicago, releasing his first song ("Coffee Pot" on ClubHouse Records) the same year. Up until this point, music had been a hobby fueled by cobbling together tracks on his "sixty-buck keyboard, a cheap four-track and a cheap drum machine" set-up while still an undergraduate at the University of Illinois. This DIY method of production was never taken seriously, and when childhood plans to become a doctor were shelved, Jones was firmly committed to a career as a chemical engineer. His father was an occasional DJ and eventually became a budding musician. As time went on, Jones discovered what was his innate love and understanding for house music, a sound that had grown throughout the mid-1980s out of Chicago's deep-rooted house music scene. He played the saxophone at school and had a talent for trying to play with a keyboard but remained largely un-interested in what he saw as his father's passion. It was this cut-up and tacky production style of the early house sound that Jones absorbed and translated into the "Underground Goodies" EP, his first release as Cajmere (the CAJ derived from the artist's initials) ) put out in 1991 on his own recently started Cajual label. A year later he had his first massive hit as Cajmere with the house tune "Coffee Pot (It's Time for the Percolator)," which was also released on Cajual and distributed by NYC-based Emotive Records. He then teamed up with Chicago-based vocalist Dajae for "Brighter Days," which entered #2 on the "Billboard" Hot Dance Music/Club Play, a high-impact and mellower house tune that was released on Cajual and distributed by NYC-based Emotive Records.

Interested in making something totally different from his Cajmere moniker and other work, Curtis created Relief as an offshoot to his Cajual records in 1993. The first Relief release was also his first Green Velvet production, 1993's "Velvet Tracks," which came from a name given to him by a girlfriend's father, emerged as the flamboyant, neon-haired electro punk, although in interviews he denied being linked to the Punk lifestyle and fashion, as he was more inspired by the likes of David Bowie and Sly and the Family Stone, he created mid-1990s hits such as "Preacher Man," on which a Moral Majority-type of preacher spoke (the Reverend Trotter, not, contrary to popular belief, Reverend Franklin); "Answering Machine," a darkly funny house track consisting of taped messages from an answering machine, including a bad news message from a girlfriend and a noise complaint message from his landlord—all made with Jones's voice; and "Flash," which was a #1 US dance hit in 1995 and was included on many DJ-mixed compilation albums. After DJing under both of his now infamous monikers, he released his first album, "Constant Chaos", with Belgian Music label Music Man in 1999, which showed Green Velvet's style of house progress into styles similar to Prince and Kraftwerk, his spoken-word monologues also took a bizarre turn. In "Abduction" he spoke about little green men turning up while washing dishes.

By the time "Constant Chaos" was released, Jones had temporarily halted activity on his labels for almost a year. Still DJing as Cajmere he'd narrowed the Green Velvet persona down to live performances only, taking time out to re-group and work out what to do next. During 2000, Jones was briefly signed to Warner Bros. Records' short-lived F-111 imprint, where he released his second compilation album, the self-titled "Green Velvet", which contained the double-A-sided single “Flash” backed with “Answering Machine.” During this time he gave Velvet a new hairstyle—from spiked, green foam nodules to yellow mohawk. Next, in 2001, he unleashed his second album, the dark "Whatever", which was a step away from his Kraftwerk-inspired sound (although "Sleepwalking" had a similar style) to a darker, more political Punk-esque style. On the album he tackled such issues as racism (highlighted on the song "When?"), drug use (highlighted on "Genedefekt" and "La La Land"), alienation (highlighted on "Sleepwalking"), and being told what to wear and do by “the system” (highlighted on the heavily punk-inspired track "Gat"). The more punk-oriented songs on the album apparently came from hours spent listening to industrial bands such as Nitzer Ebb and Liaisons Dangereuses, and lots of "underground American industrial stuff." He released the single "La La Land" in 2001, originally designed as a wake-up call for clubbers to the dangers of pill-taking it became one of his most popular tunes. This was followed by "Genedefekt". His live act had now became more like a rock band also, with the Curtis playing a keytar, and two other musicians (aptly named Nazuk and Spaceboy) backing him, playing heavily distorted synths. Initially Jones, as both Cajmere and Green Velvet, was receiving more attention in Europe than he did in the USA, playing a Radio One live session on the Jo Whiley show and playing a host of festivals.

After appearing under a host of different names for his various remixing and side projects, Green Velvet released his third album, "Walk In Love", in 2005. This album had a more house music-oriented style to it, but the odd Prince- and Punk-sounding tracks still remained, as Curtis actually got a live guitarist to play on "Come Back" and the closing track "Pin-Up Girl" had a similarity to New York-based Electroclash group Fischerspooner. After "Walk In Love", Green Velvet produced and remixed releases for fellow Relief Records artists and himself, and played a host of DJ session live shows in 2006.

After staying quiet in the music scene, Green Velvet revealed in 2006 he had become a born-again Christian after a serious overdose of a mixture of Magic Mushrooms, Marijuana and (allegedly) GHB, and promised to turn his life around after this incident. His latest release, the single "Shake and Pop", is a departure from the recent darker electronica style, as he claims he has found a brighter future since converting. In 2007, he released the online-only track "Love Peace, Not War", a short ditty in response to the United States' war in Iraq.

In 2014, Green Velvet joined forces with Claude VonStroke, another veteran artist who grew up in the Mid-West, to form a side project known as Get Real. With both having a noticeable impact on both the house and techno scenes, many wondered why this duo didn't happen sooner. In reality, the project was by accident. However, it couldn't have turned out better. Their first release came out as an EP on Claude's label, Dirtybird, with the appearance of “Mind Yo Bizness” and “Snuffaluffagus". Claude has stated, “Nobody is trying to steal the spotlight or take over the project which isn’t always the case in a duo. We each represent our style but we make a new style by working together.”




Release title / Record label / year




</doc>
<doc id="52389974" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52389974" title="Ben Woodburn">
Ben Woodburn

Benjamin Woodburn (born 15 October 1999) is a Welsh professional footballer who plays as a forward for Premier League club Liverpool, and for the Wales national team.

Woodburn became Liverpool's third-youngest player in history upon making his senior debut in November 2016 and the club's youngest-ever goalscorer in his second appearance. He is also Wales' second-youngest-ever goalscorer behind Gareth Bale, having netted on his senior debut at the age of 17 in September 2017.

Born in Nottingham, Woodburn was raised in Tattenhall, Cheshire and played both cricket and football from a young age. He joined Liverpool's academy at under-7 level where he steadily progressed through the youth ranks, leading to former academy director Frank McParland identifying him as one of the brightest prospects at the club. During his schooling, Liverpool agreed to a request from Woodburn's parents that he should stay at home rather than in Rainhill, which was closer to the academy in Kirkby. In order to facilitate his development, the club arranged for a driver to transport him every day from training back to his home in Tattenhall. When he was 15 years old, Woodburn left his high school, Bishop Heber High School and was fast-tracked from Liverpool's under-16s to the under-18s where his rapid development saw him included in Liverpool's "Futures Group", a programme which afforded the club's most talented young players a weekly opportunity to train with then first-team coach, Pep Lijnders.

Having impressed first-team manager Jürgen Klopp during these training sessions, Woodburn was handed his non-competitive debut during the 2016–17 pre-season in a 1–0 win over Tranmere Rovers. He came off the bench in Liverpool's next match to score one and assist another for Roberto Firmino in a 5–0 friendly win over Fleetwood Town. Woodburn then, along with Kevin Stewart and fellow academy graduate Trent Alexander-Arnold, signed his first professional contract with Liverpool on 8 November 2016.

He made his senior debut for Liverpool on 26 November, coming on as a 92nd-minute substitute for Georginio Wijnaldum in a 2–0 Premier League victory over Sunderland. Upon doing so, Woodburn became Liverpool's third-youngest debutant of all time at the age of 17 years and 42 days, and the club's second-youngest-ever in the Premier League, behind Jack Robinson. Three days later, he became Liverpool's youngest-ever goalscorer at the age of 17 years and 45 days when he came off the bench to score in an EFL Cup quarter-final win over Leeds United, bettering Michael Owen's record by 98 days. Following his rapid development at Liverpool, both Sky Sports and "The Guardian" named Woodburn as one of the top young players to watch in 2017.

On 8 January 2017, he became the then-youngest player to represent the club in the FA Cup when he started in a 0–0 draw with Plymouth Argyle. His first start in the league followed on 4 April in a 2–1 away triumph over Stoke City which saw him become the third-youngest player to start for Liverpool in the Premier League era behind Owen and Jordon Ibe. The following week he was nominated for the 2017 European Golden Boy award, but was beaten by French forward, Kylian Mbappé. On 9 May, Woodburn won Liverpool's Academy Player of the Season award following a campaign which saw him score eight goals in Premier League 2 and break into the first team. He was also later nominated for the Premier League 2 Player of the Season award alongside Alexander-Arnold, though the award was ultimately won by Swansea City's Oliver McBurnie.

The following season, Liverpool's academy coach Steven Gerrard named Woodburn as captain of the under-19 side for the club's UEFA Youth League campaign, a competition which ran parallel to the season's UEFA Champions League. He made just one senior appearance, as a substitute, during the first half of the season but signed a new long-term deal with Liverpool in October and was named BBC Wales Young Sportsman of the Year in December.

Woodburn continued to represent the youth and reserve sides at the start of the second half of the season. On 21 February 2018, he scored once and assisted another as Liverpool beat Manchester United's U19 side 2–0 to qualify for the quarter finals of the UEFA Youth League. There, the club was eliminated by Manchester City. He made his second and only other senior appearance for the season on 13 May, coming on as a late substitute for Mohamed Salah in a 4–0 league win over Brighton. On 1 July, he and club teammates Alexander-Arnold and Herbie Kane were named on the shortlist for the 2018 Golden Boy award.

On 31 July 2018, Woodburn signed on a season-long loan with Championship side, Sheffield United. He made his debut for the club four days later, coming off the bench for David McGoldrick in a 2–1 loss to Swansea. His first start followed on 14 August in a League Cup tie against Hull City where, with the scores level after regulation time, the match progressed to a penalty shootout. Woodburn converted his spot kick but Sheffield United were ultimately defeated after his former Liverpool teammate Kevin Stewart scored the winning penalty for Hull. He struggled for game time during the first half of the season, however, compounded by an ankle injury sustained in December and by the mid-way point of the campaign had only made eight appearances for the club. He was subsequently recalled from his loan by Liverpool.

Following his return to Anfield, Woodburn was touted for a loan move to Hull City but a deal failed to materialize before the closing of the transfer window.

Prior to making his senior international debut, Woodburn was eligible to represent both Wales, through his maternal grandfather, and England. During his early teens he attended a training camp with the England schoolboys' team and was later offered an under-16 call-up by England in August 2014. He rejected the call-up and chose to remain in the Wales setup at the time. After his club debut with Liverpool in November 2016, it was reported that England remained hopeful of convincing Woodburn to switch his international allegiance despite previously being rebuffed. The possibility was ended in September the following year when he made his senior international debut for Wales in a competitive fixture.

Woodburn has played for Wales up to U19 level and was first called up to train at one of the nation's regional development centres at Dragon Park when he was 13. He played for Wales U15s in two games against Poland in March 2014, scored a hat-trick for the U16 side against Northern Ireland the following year and then captained the U17 team against Greece in 2016. Later that year, he represented the U19 side in their UEFA European Under-19 Championship qualification matches and scored a brace in a 6–2 win over Luxembourg.

On 16 March 2017, Woodburn was called up by head coach Chris Coleman to the Wales senior team for the first time, aged 17, for the nation's World Cup qualifier against the Republic of Ireland. He remained an unused substitute, however, as Wales played out a 0–0 draw in Dublin. He made his senior debut on 2 September, coming on as a second-half substitute for Tom Lawrence and scoring a 25-yard strike in a 1–0 win against Austria. In doing so, he became Wales' second-youngest-ever goalscorer behind Gareth Bale and kept the nation within reach of qualification. Woodburn featured regularly from the bench towards the back end of the qualification campaign as Wales ultimately fell two points short of a play-off spot. He then made his first start on 14 November in a 1–1 friendly draw with Panama. He scored his second goal for Wales on 20 March 2019 against Trinidad and Tobago, scoring in the last minute to salvage a 1–0 win.

"Wales score listed first, score column indicates score after each Woodburn goal."


Liverpool



</doc>
<doc id="59601061" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59601061" title="Rafael Camacho">
Rafael Camacho

Rafael Euclides Soares Camacho (born 22 May 2000) is a Portuguese professional footballer who plays for the famous football club named Liverpool.

A Portugal U17 international, Camacho joined Liverpool’s academy from Sporting Lisbon at the end of the 2015–16 season following a successful trial. He is a versatile player who can play anywhere across the front line but had also featured at right back and wing back.

Camacho was named on the bench for the Merseyside Derby against Everton in the Premier League on 7 April 2018 as a late injury replacement for Alberto Moreno but did not make an appearance. In December 2018 he was named on the bench for Premier League games against Burnley and Manchester United. He made his senior debut in the FA Cup third round against Wolverhampton Wanderers on 7 January 2019. He made his league debut 12 days later, coming on as a late substitute in a 4–3 win over Crystal Palace.

Camacho is of Angolan descent.


</doc>
<doc id="37821010" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37821010" title="Loris Karius">
Loris Karius

Loris Sven Karius (born 22 June 1993) is a German professional footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for Süper Lig club Beşiktaş, on loan from Premier League club Liverpool. He represented Germany at youth level.

Born in Biberach, Karius began his career with Stuttgart before moving to Manchester City in 2009. After two years in Manchester City's youth system, he returned to Germany with Mainz 05. He established himself as first-choice goalkeeper for the Bundesliga side before transferring to Liverpool in 2016 for a fee of £4.75 million.

Karius was born in Biberach, Baden-Württemberg on 22 June 1993 to Christine and Harald Karius. Harald intended for his son to become a motocross rider, but Loris' grandfather, Karl, encouraged him to focus on football.

Karius attended Pestalozzi-Gymnasium Biberach until his move to England in 2009 where he was then privately tutored.

Karius played for local team SG Mettenberg and SSV Ulm 1846 before joining VfB Stuttgart, where he rose through the youth ranks and appeared for the German under-16 national team against Macedonia in September 2008.

Manchester City invited Karius and his family to England after watching him in Germany's under-16 game against Azerbaijan, and completed his signing on 1 July 2009. Karius played for the under-18 and the under-21 Manchester City teams, but failed to make a senior appearance during his time in Manchester.

Manchester City loaned Karius to Mainz 05 in August 2011, where he played for Mainz 05's reserve team, Mainz 05 II, in the Regionalliga. On 11 January 2012, the move was made permanent with Karius committing himself to a two-year deal with an option for a third year that would extend his contract to June 2015.

He made his Mainz 05 debut on 1 December 2012 in a Bundesliga match against Hannover 96 when he was substituted for Shawn Parker after goalkeeper Christian Wetklo had been sent off, which, aged 19 years, 5 months and 9 days old, made Karius the youngest goalkeeper ever to play in the Bundesliga. He made no further appearances in the 2012–13 season, but established himself as first-choice goalkeeper in the 2013–14 season and on 12 January 2015 signed a three-year contract extension.

Karius was ever-present in the 2015–16 season, keeping nine clean sheets, saving two penalties and being voted the second-best goalkeeper in the league in a poll of 235 fellow Bundesliga players, ranking behind only Manuel Neuer.

On 24 May 2016, Karius signed with Liverpool for a fee of £4.75 million on a five-year deal. He was given the number 1 jersey.

He made his debut in a 3–0 EFL Cup win over Derby County on 20 September 2016. He played his first Premier League match against Hull City, which ended in a 5–1 victory for the Reds, on 24 September. He kept his first Premier League clean sheet on 17 October in a 0–0 draw with rivals Manchester United. On 24 October 2016, Jürgen Klopp confirmed that Karius was Liverpool's first-choice goalkeeper, ahead of Simon Mignolet. After two sub-par performances in early December, which included spilling Lewis Cook’s tame shot into the path of Nathan Aké to tap home into an empty net to give Bournemouth a 4–3 win, Karius was dropped from the starting eleven. Regarding this decision, Klopp stated he wanted to take Karius "out the firing line," and that "Karius is a young goalkeeper. He will bounce back."

In the 2018 Champions League quarter-final 2nd leg at Manchester City, with the aggregate scoreline at 3–1 to Liverpool Karius was involved in a controversial incident when he failed to clear a cross into the penalty area, punching the ball downward which ricocheted off teammate James Milner and into the path of Man City striker Gabriel Jesus who scored, only for the linesman to incorrectly give offside. In the Champions League semi-final home leg against AS Roma, with the scoreline at 0–0 Karius let Aleksandar Kolarov’s shot go through his hands with the ball then hitting the crossbar, before Liverpool went on to win 5–2. In the away game in Rome, Karius was involved in controversy when he came rushing out of his goal and brought down Edin Dzeko inside the penalty area, but instead of a penalty and red card the linesman gave offside in what "The Telegraph" called “an extremely tight call”. Minutes later Karius parried a Roma shot into the path of Dzeko who made the scoreline 2–1 to Roma, before the game finished 4–2 to Roma and 7–6 to Liverpool on aggregate.

Karius started for Liverpool against Real Madrid in the 2018 UEFA Champions League Final which Liverpool lost 3–1. He was deemed at fault for two of the goals, the first and third; the first after his throw was blocked by Karim Benzema and deflected into the net, and the second after he mishandled Gareth Bale's 40-yard strike.

After the match, he wept and tearfully apologised to Liverpool fans who remained in the stands. He also stated that his mistakes "lost the team the final". After the match, Karius received online death threats, mainly on Twitter, which prompted Merseyside Police to launch an investigation. Five days later, Karius underwent an examination at Massachusetts General Hospital. Medics concluded he had suffered a concussion from an elbow to his head, reportedly from Sergio Ramos just minutes before his first mistake. Doctors, however, did not pinpoint the exact moment he was concussed. According to doctor Ross Zafonte, it was possible the concussion affected his performance. Later, on 6 July, at the start of pre season, Klopp stated that Karius was "100% influenced by his concussion", leading to his errors, with Klopp saying "We don't use it as an excuse, we use it as an explanation. For me, it's 100% the explanation [for his performance]. He was influenced by that knock – that is 100%".

Karius’s handling was back in the spotlight in July 2018 during pre season with Liverpool. In the warm-up to Liverpool’s pre-season opener against Chester City, footage showed Karius spilling the ball into his own net. Against Tranmere Rovers on 10 July, he fumbled a free-kick which directly led to a goal. Nine days later Liverpool broke the world transfer fee record for a goalkeeper when they signed Alisson for an initial fee of €62.5 million (£56m), which could rise to €72 million (£66.8 million) with performance-based bonuses, and relegated Karius to a back up. Against Borussia Dortmund on 22 July, Karius came rushing out of his box but his scuffed clearance fell straight into the path of Maximilian Philipp who was unable to put the ball into the empty net from 40 yards. He was deemed at fault for Dortmund’s third goal late on when he parried Christian Pulisic’s shot from close range directly into the path of Jacob Bruun Larsen, who scored.

On 25 August 2018, Karius joined Turkish club Beşiktaş on a two-year loan move. In March 2019, he sought legal action against Beşiktaş for back payment of four months' wages which he alleged the club had failed to pay him.

Karius represented Germany at all youth levels from under-16 onward, but his appearances were limited due to competition from Manuel Neuer, Timo Horn and Marc-André ter Stegen.

Liverpool



</doc>
<doc id="19833739" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19833739" title="Nathaniel Clyne">
Nathaniel Clyne

Nathaniel Edwin Clyne (born 5 April 1991) is an English professional footballer who plays as a right back for AFC Bournemouth, on loan from fellow club Liverpool, and the English national team.

He began his career at Crystal Palace, playing regularly in four Championship seasons, before a move to Southampton in 2012, where he spent three seasons in the Premier League. He joined Liverpool in July 2015 for a fee of £12.5 million.

Formerly an international at under-19 and under-21 level, Clyne made his senior international debut for England in November 2014. He was selected for UEFA Euro 2016.

Clyne was born in Stockwell, London. He made his first-team debut for Crystal Palace in a 3–0 Championship win against Barnsley at Selhurst Park on 18 October 2008. He signed a three-year professional contract with the club two days later, with manager Neil Warnock stating that Clyne "has a bright future in the game". His first career goal came on 8 December 2009, when he opened a 4–2 win at Reading in the seventh minute. In February 2010 he was offered a move to Premier League club Wolverhampton Wanderers, but rejected it without even entering talks with manager Mick McCarthy.

In the 2010–11 season, Clyne was the youngest player in the Football League to play every single match of that campaign, and won Crystal Palace's Player of the Year award.

On 19 July 2012, Clyne signed a four-year deal with newly promoted Premier League club Southampton. He made his debut on 19 August, in a 3–2 defeat against Manchester City at the City of Manchester Stadium. His first match at St Mary's came six days later in a 0–2 defeat by Wigan Athletic. He scored his first goal for the club on 22 September, in a 4–1 win at home against Aston Villa, set up by Gastón Ramírez with England under-21 coach Stuart Pearce in attendance at St Mary's. His second goal for the club came in the FA Cup third round against Burnley on 4 January 2014, opening an eventual 4–3 home victory with a 25-yard strike past Tom Heaton.

Clyne scored in Southampton's first match of the 2014–15 season, a 2–1 defeat against Liverpool at Anfield on 17 August. He scored his second goal of the campaign on 23 September, with a long-range effort which gave Southampton a 2–1 victory at Arsenal in the League Cup third round. On 24 November, he finished Ryan Bertrand's 81st-minute cross to earn a 1–1 draw away to Aston Villa.

On 1 July 2015, Liverpool confirmed the signing of Clyne from Southampton for £12.5 million on a five-year contract, with his former club, Crystal Palace receiving a payment of £2.5M. Clyne made his debut in a Liverpool shirt against the True Thai Premier League All Stars in Bangkok on 14 July as part of the club's pre-season tour. He made his competitive debut on 10 August in a 1–0 away win against Stoke City in the first match of the 2015–16 Premier League season. On 8 October, Clyne scored his first Liverpool goal in a 1–0 League Cup fourth round victory over AFC Bournemouth; the team's first win under Jürgen Klopp. His first league goal came on 14 February 2016, in a 6–0 win away to Aston Villa.

In March 2016, in Liverpool's first European matches against rivals Manchester United, Clyne won a penalty that Daniel Sturridge converted in the first leg, and conceded a penalty scored by Anthony Martial in the second, as Liverpool won 3–1 on aggregate in the last 16 of the UEFA Europa League. On 18 May, he played the full 90 minutes in the final, a 3–1 loss to Sevilla in Basel.

Prior to the 2017–18 season, Clyne suffered a back injury expected to rule him out until February 2018. On 31 March 2018, having missed the entire campaign up to this point, he made his first appearance on the team sheet as an unused substitute in Liverpool's 2–1 league victory away to former club Crystal Palace. A week later on 7 April, he made his long-awaited return, keeping a clean sheet in a 0–0 draw against Everton in a Merseyside derby clash.

Clyne joined Premier League club Bournemouth on 4 January 2019 on loan for the remainder of the 2018–19 season. He made his debut on 5 January in a 3–1 FA Cup defeat by Brighton and Hove Albion.

Clyne was born in England and is of Grenadian descent.

On 2 October 2014, Clyne was named in the England squad for the UEFA Euro 2016 qualifiers against San Marino and Estonia later that month. He was an unused substitute in both matches. Clyne said "My aim, now, is to try to make myself first choice for Euro 2016. That's what I'm going to keep pushing for." On 15 November, he made his full international debut in a home qualifier against Slovenia, playing the full 90 minutes of a 3–1 victory. Clyne went on to establish himself as first choice right back for England, appearing in five of their last six qualifiers.

Liverpool

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="39513126" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39513126" title="Marko Grujić">
Marko Grujić

Marko Grujić (, ; born 13 April 1996) is a Serbian professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Hertha BSC on loan from Liverpool, and the Serbia national team.

A native of Belgrade, Grujić started his career with his hometown club Red Star Belgrade, progressing through their youth system to the first team squad. He made his professional debut in 2013, and won the SuperLiga title in his final season with Red Star before completing a £5.1 million move to Liverpool.

Grujić is a Serbian international, and represented Serbia at every youth level from under-16 upwards before making his full international debut in May 2016. He was part of the Serbian side which won the 2015 U-20 World Cup.

Grujić was born in Belgrade, FR Yugoslavia (now Serbia) and is a product of Red Star Belgrade, where he went through the youth program, passed all categories and was the captain of his generation. He made his professional debut for Red Star on 26 May 2013, in a Serbian SuperLiga match versus Vojvodina.

On 17 May 2015, Grujić signed a three-year contract with Red Star to last until 2018. Grujić scored his first senior goal on 26 September 2015 against Novi Pazar in a 2–0 victory; he also assisted Aleksandar Katai for the second goal. Grujić was a part of an unprecedented run of Red Star victories, as the club set a new record for the number of consecutive victories (19), ending the first half of the season without defeat.

Throughout autumn, Grujić was scouted by a number of high-profile European teams, including Liverpool, Internazionale, Juventus, Chelsea, and Milan. Liverpool manager Jürgen Klopp called Grujić personally to convince him to switch to Anfield, but initially Grujić's father was against his son moving to Liverpool. Klopp's assistant, Željko Buvač, flew to Belgrade to speak with Grujić and on 6 January 2016, it was confirmed that Grujić completed his move to Premier League side Liverpool, signing a five-year deal for a reported fee of £5.1 million. Upon joining, Grujić hailed Klopp for convincing him to join and told the press, "I would choose Liverpool over Real Madrid and Barcelona."

He was immediately loaned back to Red Star until the end of the season for a fee of £740,000, and won the SuperLiga with Red Star while on loan. Grujić finished the season with 29 appearances, 6 goals, 7 assists and was voted into the SuperLiga Team of the Year for his contribution to Red Star's unbeaten season.

On 20 August 2016, Grujić made his Premier League debut for Liverpool in a 2–0 loss against Burnley, coming on in the place of Adam Lallana in the 78th minute.

On 17 January 2018, Grujić joined Championship side Cardiff City on loan for the remainder of the 2017–18 season. He made his debut for the club three days later, playing in a 0–0 draw with Sheffield Wednesday. Grujić's first goal for Cardiff came in a 2–1 home victory over Barnsley on 6 March 2018, scoring from range just after the start of the second half.

On 19 August 2018, Grujić joined Bundesliga club Hertha BSC on a one-year loan. He scored his first goal for the club on 8 December, netting the only goal in a 1–0 win over Eintracht Frankfurt. Hertha coach Pal Dardai hailed Grujić as "by far the best midfielder at Hertha Berlin in 20 years".

Grujić represented Serbia at all youth levels from under-16 to under-21, and was a member of the Serbia squad that won the 2015 FIFA U-20 World Cup in New Zealand.

In May 2016, Grujić made his full international debut for the Serbia national team after coming on in place of Nemanja Matić in a 2–1 win against Cyprus.

In May 2018 he was named in Serbia's preliminary squad for the 2018 FIFA World Cup in Russia.

In June 2018 he was selected in Serbia's squad for the 2018 World Cup, but he failed to make any appearances there.

Standing at 6-foot-3-inches (1.91 m), Grujić has been described as "tall, rangy, comfortable on the ball and with a good range of passing" and dubbed the "new Matić" because of his likeness in both appearance and position to fellow Serbian defensive midfielder Nemanja Matić.

Red Star Belgrade

Cardiff City

Serbia U20




</doc>
<doc id="24715453" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24715453" title="Danny Ings">
Danny Ings

Daniel William John Ings (born 23 July 1992) is an English professional footballer who plays as a forward for Southampton, on loan from fellow club Liverpool, and the England national team.

Ings started his career in the youth team of Southampton but was released as a schoolboy. He subsequently joined AFC Bournemouth, progressing through their youth system, while also spending time at Dorchester Town on loan. In 2011 Ings joined Burnley with whom he won the 2013–14 Championship Player of the Year, and helped them achieve promotion to the Premier League. Following Burnley's relegation, and the expiry of his contract with the club, Ings moved to Liverpool in the summer of 2015, but his first season at Anfield was ended after two months due to injury. His second season with Liverpool was also mired by injury, with Ings only making two League Cup appearances throughout the 2016–17 season. Ings joined Southampton on loan in August 2018, with an obligation to buy at the end of the season.

Formerly an under-21 international, Ings made his senior debut for England in October 2015.

Ings was born in Winchester, Hampshire and grew up in Netley, Hampshire. As a child he attended Netley Abbey Primary School and Hamble Community Sports College. Ings dreamed of playing for local club Southampton, but was rejected for being too small. He signed for Southampton from Netley Central Sports, before being released as a school boy. After his release, Ings played for Itchen Tyro. He subsequently signed a two-year apprentice contract with AFC Bournemouth in May 2008, having progressed through the club's Centre of Excellence while he was still at secondary school at Hamble Community Sports College. He had also previously had experience playing for the reserve team. He made his professional debut for Bournemouth on 6 October 2009, in a 2–1 away defeat to Northampton Town in the Football League Trophy, replacing Jason Tindall in the second half as a substitute. His second season in the youth team was blighted by a long-term abdominal injury, which restricted his playing time. He remained with the youth team until the summer of 2010, when he signed a short-term three-month contract. He extended his contract in September 2010, until the end of the 2010–11 campaign.

In September 2010, he was sent on an initial one-month loan to Conference South club Dorchester Town. His debut for the Magpies came on 11 September 2010, scoring the equaliser in a 2–1 home defeat to Ebbsfleet United. His second goal for Dorchester came on 24 September, scoring a penalty in a 4–1 win over Mangotsfield United in the FA Cup. On 6 October, his loan was extended for a further month. His next goal came in a 4–1 defeat to Havant & Waterlooville as the Magpies were knocked out of the FA Cup. On 16 October, he scored the second in a 2–0 league win over Lewes, after coming on as a late substitute for Giuseppe Sole. He got his fifth goal in a 2–1 away win over Staines Town, scoring the opener. His first goal in November came in a 2–1 home defeat to Maidenhead United, which ended an unbeaten run of six matches. On 12 November 2010, his loan was extended for a third time for an additional month. He scored the second in a 3–1 win over Weston-super-Mare in the FA Trophy to help them progress to the next round. On 23 November, his spell at Dorchester was cut short as he was recalled from his loan by Bournemouth due to an injury crisis at the club.

On 30 November, he signed a new contract extension which lasted until 2012. He made his league debut and first start for Bournemouth on 28 December 2010, in a 2–0 away defeat to Milton Keynes Dons in League One, where he was substituted off in the first half for Steve Fletcher. He started to become a first-team regular and scored his first professional goal against Swindon Town on 1 February 2011, in a 3–2 win at Dean Court. His form saw him rewarded with a new contract extension, lasting until 2013. On 26 February 2011, he scored a header to equalise in 2–1 win away at Dagenham & Redbridge in the league. On 1 April he added to his tally with a goal against Peterborough United in a 3–3 draw. He went through a rich vein of goalscoring from in April, scoring four goals in three matches. He scored an overhead kick to equalise in the last minute against Tranmere Rovers, however, the Cherries went on to lose the match 2–1. He also scored in a 2–0 away victory over Notts County. He scored his first brace in a 2–2 draw with Yeovil Town, including one penalty. His final goal for Bournemouth came in the last match of the season, in the play-off semi-final defeat to Huddersfield Town, as Bournemouth were knocked out on penalties.

In the summer of 2011, he was linked with reported moves away from Bournemouth with Celtic, Liverpool and Newcastle United. Premier League club Fulham also had a £400,000 bid rejected by the club. In July 2011, he was rewarded with his fifth contract in twelve months, improving his deal to be one of the top earners at the club. He remained at the club through pre-season and started in the first match of the season in a 3–0 away defeat to Charlton Athletic. It proved to be his final appearance for the club.

On 15 August 2011, Ings signed for Championship club Burnley for an undisclosed fee believed to be in the region of £1 million, on a four-year contract. He rejoined former Bournemouth manager Eddie Howe who had made the same move eight months earlier.

He made his debut on 14 February 2012, in a 2–0 win over Barnsley at Turf Moor, where he came on as a late substitute for Charlie Austin. His first start came a month later on 10 March 2012, in a 1–1 home draw with Crystal Palace in the league. His first goal for Burnley came on 31 March, in a 5–1 win against Portsmouth at Fratton Park. His second goal came in the following match, where he scored the equaliser in a 3–1 defeat to Birmingham City. He scored his third goal of the season in the final match of the season, a 30-yard strike in a 1–1 home draw with Bristol City.

He started the 2012–13 season as a first choice regular in pre-season following the sale of striker Jay Rodriguez to Southampton. He scored in friendly wins over Altrincham and Bury. He suffered another serious knee injury in the final pre-season match, a 3–1 defeat to Rochdale. He tore the knee cartilage in the opposite knee to the previous season which resulted in surgery, keeping him out of action for up to six months.

Following the departure of top-scorer Charlie Austin to Queens Park Rangers, Ings became the main striker ahead of the 2013–14 season. He put together a string of impressive performances in the Clarets' pre-season campaign and scored two goals in the opening three league matches as well as a goal in the League Cup against York City. For his continued good start to the season Ings was named the Championship Player of the Month for October.

In March 2014, Ings won Championship Player of the Year at the Football League Awards, ahead of the two other nominees: Leeds United striker Ross McCormack and Leicester City midfielder Danny Drinkwater. He ended the 2013–14 Championship season with 22 goals as Burnley finished second and gained promotion to the Premier League.

On 19 August 2014, Ings made his Premier League debut in a 3–1 loss to Chelsea at Turf Moor. His first Premier League goal came in a 1–3 defeat to Everton on 26 October.

On 22 November 2014, Ings scored both of Burnley's goals in a 2–1 win at Stoke City for their first away win of the Premier League season, his two goals coming in the space of two minutes. He made his 100th league appearance for Burnley in a 1–0 win against Southampton on 13 December.

During January and February 2015, Ings scored five goals in six Premier League matches, helping the team to achieve draws with Newcastle United and West Bromwich Albion, and defeat Queens Park Rangers. In May, he scored the winning goal in 1–0 victories over Hull City and Aston Villa respectively to end the season with 11 goals from 35 league appearances.

On 8 June 2015, Liverpool announced that they had agreed on personal terms with Ings, subject to a medical, as well as a developmental fee due to Burnley for players under 24, to be negotiated between two clubs or determined by a tribunal. Under tribunal the fee would be decided by the Professional Football Compensation Committee. On 28 April 2016, the saga was finally settled. Liverpool would pay Burnley a record fee for a tribunal hearing: £6.5 million up front, with an extra £1.5 million in player performance-related bonuses. Burnley will also receive 20% of any future fee should Liverpool sell the striker.

Ings made his competitive debut on 29 August 2015 in a 3–0 defeat against West Ham at Anfield. He made his European debut for the club on 17 September in the UEFA Europa League group stage match against Bordeaux, as a substitute for Divock Origi in a 1–1 draw. Three days later, he replaced Christian Benteke at half time and within three minutes scored his first Liverpool goal in a 1–1 draw against Norwich City. On 4 October 2015, he opened a draw of the same score against Everton in the Merseyside derby.

On 15 October 2015, in his first training session under new manager Jürgen Klopp, Ings suffered an anterior cruciate ligament injury in his left knee and was ruled out for the remainder of the season. However, Ings returned sooner than anticipated, making a substitute appearance in the final match of the season, a 1–1 draw away to West Bromwich Albion. Ings began the 2016–17 season playing in the reserves to help regain fitness. On 25 October 2016, Ings sustained damage to his right knee in a League Cup match against Tottenham Hotspur that would require another spell on the sidelines of up to 9 months. He successfully underwent surgery to repair the damage to his knee and began rehabilitation at Melwood on 9 November.

On 19 September 2017, Ings made his first appearance in 11 months since the injury when he came on as a second-half substitute in the 2–0 defeat to Leicester City in the EFL Cup. On 21 April 2018, he scored his first goal after his return from injury in a 2–2 draw with West Brom. This was his first goal since 2015 and also his first goal under Jürgen Klopp.

After struggling playing time in the 2017–18 season due to the form of attackers Roberto Firmino, Mohamed Salah, and Sadio Mané, Ings requested a move away from Liverpool in the summer of 2018. Ings was a popular figure in the dressing room and Jurgen Klopp was reluctant to let him leave in spite of his limited appearances in the previous season. Ings joined Premier League club Southampton on 9 August 2018 on an initial loan until the end of the season, which would become permanent on 1 July 2019, for a reported fee of £18 million, plus a possible further £2 million based on appearances. On 12 August, he made his debut as a second-half substitute in a goalless draw with former club Burnley. He then scored on his first start five days later in a 2–1 defeat to Everton before netting the opening goal in Southampton's 2–0 win over Crystal Palace at the start of the following month, helping the club to their first win of the campaign.

On 3 October 2013, Ings received his first international call-up to the England national under-21 team by manager Gareth Southgate. He made his debut a week later as a substitute in a 4–0 win away to San Marino. He won his second cap in the reverse fixture on 19 November, and scored twice as England won 9–0 against San Marino at the New Meadow. He earned 13 caps and scored four goals for the under-21s from 2013 to 2015.

On 1 October 2015, Ings received his first international call-up to the full England national team from manager Roy Hodgson, for the final UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying matches against Estonia and Lithuania. He made his debut in the latter match on 12 October, replacing Harry Kane after 59 minutes of an eventual 3–0 win in Vilnius.

Off the field, Ings has gained a reputation for charitable acts. In November 2014, he launched and funded the Danny Ings Disability Sport Project to provide football coaching to children with disabilities and learning difficulties after being inspired to do so by a young disabled Burnley fan. His father Shayne Ings initially played as a winger and then as a full back for Hampshire-based Netley Central Sports. He still works as a self-employed bricklayer and the family still live in the same house in Netley.

Burnley

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="24527795" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24527795" title="Ádám Bogdán">
Ádám Bogdán

Ádám Bogdán (; born 27 September 1987) is a Hungarian professional footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for Hibernian, on loan from Liverpool, and the Hungary national team.

Bogdán began his career in Hungary at Vasas before spending time on loan at Vecsés. In 2007, he moved to English club Bolton Wanderers, for whom he made 120 appearances across all competitions, before moving to Liverpool in 2015. Rarely used at Liverpool, he had a loan at Wigan Athletic in 2016, cut short by injury.
He made his senior international debut in 2011. Bogdán has since earned 20 caps and represented Hungary in 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification matches.

Born in Budapest, Bogdán started his career with Hungarian Nemzeti Bajnokság I (Division One) team Vasas SC. He also had a loan spell at Vecsés where in his 9 games he impressed Bolton scouts.

He signed for Bolton Wanderers on a two-year contract on 1 August 2007. His contract was extended in 2009 until June 2011.

In September 2009, Bogdán joined League Two team Crewe Alexandra on a one-month loan. He made his debut on 29 September 2009 in a 3–2 home defeat to Bury, during which he made an error that cost Alexandra a point.

He made his Bolton debut in a 1–0 League Cup victory over Southampton on 24 August 2010. On 29 August 2010, Bogdán made his Premier League debut when he replaced Jussi Jääskeläinen, who had been sent off for violent conduct, 37 minutes into the home game against Birmingham City. He made his first Premier League start in the away game at Arsenal on 11 September. Following Jääskeläinen's return, Bogdán returned to the bench but manager Owen Coyle gave Bogdán starts in both the League Cup and FA Cup. On 31 March 2011, he signed an extension to his existing contract, which would keep him at the club until 2014.

The 2011–12 season gave Bogdán more playing time after Jääskeläinen suffered an injury during an international break, but in his first league game, on 2 October, he conceded five goals against Chelsea and Jääskeläinen returned for the next league game. Three months later on 4 January, after Jääskeläinen suffered another injury, Bogdán returned for a game at Everton where he was beaten by a 102-yard wind assisted clearance by Everton goalkeeper Tim Howard from his own penalty area in a 2–1 victory at Goodison Park. On 14 January 2012, Bogdán saved a penalty kick from Wayne Rooney, although Bolton lost 3–0 to Manchester United.

He performed well during Jääskeläinen's absence and when the Finn returned from injury, Bogdán kept his place for the home game against Arsenal on 1 February, in which he kept a clean sheet in a goalless draw. Despite Jääskeläinen's return to full fitness, Bogdán remained first choice goalkeeper. On 11 March 2012, after Bolton's victory over QPR, and on 1 April 2012, after Bolton's 3–2 victory over Wolverhampton Wanderers, Bogdán was selected for in the "team of the week" by Garth Crooks. On 14 May 2012, Bolton Wanderers held their annual end of season dinner, with Bogdán the recipient of the main accolade as he was named the club's Player of the Year, which is voted by the supporters. Bogdán admitted he felt mixed emotions after getting the award due to the draw against Stoke City which resulted in Bolton's relegation from the Premier League.

Bogdán signed a contract extension on 29 November 2012, which extended his contract to summer 2015. During the 2014–15 season, Bogdán only made 10 appearances for Bolton, after being displaced as the team's first-choice goalkeeper by Andy Lonergan.

On 12 June 2015, it was confirmed that Bogdán would join Liverpool on a free transfer on 1 July, when his contract expired. He made his debut on 23 September, in a League Cup third round tie against Carlisle United at Anfield, and saved three penalties in the shootout, enabling his side to win the shootout 3–2.
On 20 December, he made his Premier League debut for the Reds in a 3–0 loss to Watford at Vicarage Road, dropping a corner kick after three minutes to allow Nathan Aké to open the scoring. Bogdán also played in a much-changed Liverpool side away to Exeter City on 8 January 2016 in the third round of the FA Cup, conceding direct from Lee Holmes' corner kick in a 2–2 draw.

On the last match of the 2015–16 Premier League season, Bogdán was named in the starting line up against West Brom after a long absence from the first team squad. West Brom opened the scoring through Salomón Rondón in the 13th minute, before Jordon Ibe leveled in the 23rd minute – the match ended in a 1–1 draw.

On 20 July 2016, Bogdán joined Wigan Athletic on loan for the 2016–17 season. Bogdán made 17 appearances for Wigan, keeping five clean sheets. In his final game, a 0–0 draw against Barnsley on 19 November, Bogdán suffered a tear in his anterior cruciate ligament and was substituted in the 59th minute. Bogdán then returned to his parent club Liverpool for rehabilitation.

On 2 July 2018, Bogdán moved on a season-long loan to Scottish Premiership club Hibernian. Bogdán played regularly for Hibernian during the early part of the 2018–19 season, but then missed several games due to concussion symptoms.

Bogdán received his first call up for Hungary in October 2008, and was an unused substitute in their 1–0 win over Malta. In June 2011 he made his first full international appearance, in a 1–0 win against Luxembourg. He was named as Hungarian Player of the Year for 2012. On 11 October 2013, he kept goal in the nation's record defeat, 1–8 to the Netherlands at the Amsterdam Arena in 2014 World Cup qualification.

Individual



</doc>
<doc id="47794862" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47794862" title="Ryan Kent">
Ryan Kent

Ryan Kent (born 11 November 1996) is an English professional footballer who plays as a winger for Rangers, on loan from Liverpool.

A graduate of the Liverpool academy, Kent made his professional debut in 2015, before spending consecutive loan spells with League One side Coventry City and Championship side Barnsley, winning the club's Young Player of the Season award with the latter. In 2017, he departed on loan once again, joining Bundesliga side Freiburg.

He is also a former England youth international, having previously represented his nation at U18 and U20 levels.

Oldham-born Kent joined Liverpool at the age of seven and progressed through the Liverpool academy to become a regular member of the U21 squad. After an impressive end to the 2014–15 campaign for the reserves his performances were rewarded with a new 4 and 1/2 year contract in March 2015. This was followed by a call-up to the first-team squad for their 2015 pre-season tour with the player being named in Liverpool's 30-man squad for their tour of Thailand, Australia and Malaysia. On 17 July 2015 Ryan Kent made his first-team debut when he came off the bench in the 2–1 win over Australian A-League side Brisbane Roar and was handed a first-team squad number for the Reds.

Liverpool received a number of offers to take Kent on loan after the player impressed in preseason. Kent eventually joined Coventry City in September 2015 on a youth loan deal for four months until 16 January 2016. Kent made his professional debut while on youth loan at Coventry City as a substitute on 12 September 2015 in a 1–0 League One loss to Scunthorpe United. On 3 November, Kent played and scored in a 4–3 win over Barnsley. The next day it was announced that he would return to Liverpool during the upcoming international break to be assessed by new Liverpool manager Jürgen Klopp.

On 5 January 2016 he was recalled by Liverpool and was named in the first-team to make his competitive debut for them, starting the FA Cup third round match away to Exeter City. The match ended 2–2 with Kent being withdrawn from the action after 57 minutes.

On 26 July 2016, Kent was loaned to Barnsley for the season. He scored his first goal for them in a 4–0 win against Rotherham United on 27 August 2016. Ryan Kent was named Barnsley's Young Player of the Season at the club's end of season awards.

On 10 August 2017, after an impressive preseason, Kent signed a new long term contract with Liverpool, and was loaned out to Freiburg for the season on the last day of the summer transfer window.After making just six appearances, Kent's loan spell at Freiburg was terminated and he returned to parent club Liverpool on 8 January.

On 12 January 2018, Ryan Kent joined Bristol City on loan until the end of the season.

On 22 July 2018, Kent joined Rangers on season-long loan for the 2018/19 season.

On 27 August 2015, Kent was called up to the England U20 squad for a double header against the Czech Republic.



</doc>
<doc id="51685146" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51685146" title="Ovie Ejaria">
Ovie Ejaria

Oviemuno Dominic Ejaria (born 18 November 1997) is an English professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Reading on loan from Liverpool. He is a current England U21 international.

Born in London to Nigerian parents, Ejaria grew up supporting Arsenal for whom he played for nine years before signing for Liverpool in summer 2014. His first senior appearance was in a pre-season friendly prior to the 2016-17 season against Tranmere Rovers on 8 July 2016. Despite being relatively unknown prior to the game he performed exceptionally well and caught the eye of first team manager Jürgen Klopp who selected him for four more friendlies over the summer.

His first competitive call-up came on 16 September in a Premier League match against Chelsea. He was an unused substitute in Liverpool's 2–1 victory. Four days later, he made his first team debut against Derby County in the League Cup replacing Roberto Firmino in the 3–0 victory.

On 25 October, Ejaria made his full debut in the fourth round of the EFL Cup in a 2–1 win over against Tottenham at Anfield. On 6 November 2016, he debuted in the Premier League, coming on as a substitute in Liverpool's 6–1 home win over Watford.

On 31 January 2018, Ejaria made a deadline day switch to Sunderland, signing on loan for the remainder of the season. He made 11 appearances in total as the club were relegated to League One. His only goal, and his first in senior football, came in the final match of the regular season when he opened the scoring in a 3–0 win over the eventual league champions, Wolves.

In June 2018, Ejaria moved on loan to Scottish Premiership club Rangers, managed by former Liverpool captain and academy coach Steven Gerrard, after signing a new long-term contract with Liverpool. He made his debut on 12 July, coming on as a second-half substitute in Rangers' 2–0 UEFA Europa League win over Macedonian side Shkupi. He scored his first goal for the club in a Scottish Premiership match against Motherwell on 26 August. In December 2018 his loan was curtailed earlier than planned and he returned to training with Liverpool.

A loan move to Reading was announced on January 7, 2019.

Ejaria is eligible to represent England or Nigeria internationally. He trained with the Nigeria Under-17s team in 2013 and stated that his international allegiance lay with the country in 2014. However, despite rumours of a senior Nigeria call up being in the offing, Ejaria accepted a call up to the England U20 team on 30 September 2016. He made his debut for the Under-20 team on 7 October, in a 3–1 win against Germany, playing the whole match.

Ejaria was selected for the England under-20 team in the 2017 FIFA U-20 World Cup. He made his first start in a game in the first round match against South Korea, and came on as a substitute the quarter-final against Mexico, but was an unused substitute in the final where England beat Venezuela 1–0.

He was called up for the England under-21 team in March 2018, making his debut in a friendly against Romania. He was called up again in May 2018 for the Toulon Tournament but had to withdraw from the squad due to an injury.

England U20



</doc>
<doc id="45331854" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45331854" title="Sheyi Ojo">
Sheyi Ojo

Oluwaseyi Babajide "Sheyi" Ojo (born 19 June 1997) is an English footballer who plays for Stade de Reims, on loan from Liverpool, as a winger.

Ojo joined Liverpool as a 14-year-old and came through their academy. He spent time on loan with Championship clubs Wigan Athletic and Wolverhampton Wanderers before making his competitive debut for Liverpool in January 2016.

Ojo has represented England at under-16, under-17, under-18, under-19, under-20 and under-21 levels.

Ojo joined MK Dons' academy when he was 10 years old. By the age of 13, he had played for the Dons' U18 side and was training with the first team squad. During his time at the club, Ojo became the first MK Dons trainee to receive an international cap at youth level.

On 11 November 2011, Liverpool beat off competition from a host of Europe's top clubs including a multimillion-pound offer from Chelsea to sign Ojo, then 14, for an undisclosed fee believed to be in the region of £2 million. In April 2014, Ojo was joint top scorer alongside fellow Liverpool player Harry Wilson in the prestigious U17 Future Cup.

Having made a number of appearances on Liverpool's bench over the festive period, Ojo joined Wigan Athletic on loan on 2 February 2015. Five days later, he made his professional debut coming on as a 59th-minute substitute for Wigan in a Championship match against AFC Bournemouth, with Wigan naming Ojo as their Man of the Match after he had a positive impact on the game.

On 2 August 2015, Ojo scored the winning goal for Liverpool in a friendly against Swindon Town. In 4 August 2015, Liverpool announced that Ojo had signed a new long-term contract with the club and confirmed that he would join Wolverhampton Wanderers on a season-long loan. He made his Wolves debut on the opening day of the 2015–16 Championship season as a substitute, coming on in the 84th minute and picking up a yellow card as his side went on to beat Blackburn Rovers. Three days later, he made his first start for Wolves in a 2–1 League Cup win over Newport County, assisting Nouha Dicko for Wolves' opening goal.

He was recalled by Liverpool on 7 January 2016. The next day, Ojo made his competitive first-team debut for Liverpool, as a substitute in the FA Cup Third Round tie against Exeter City that ended in a 2–2 draw. He scored his first competitive goal for Liverpool in the replay against Exeter on 20 January; his goal was the second in a 3–0 victory.

Ojo made his Premier League debut on 20 March 2016, replacing Joe Allen in the 87th minute in a 3–2 loss away to Southampton at St Mary's Stadium. Three weeks later, he made his first start for Liverpool in the Premier League against Stoke City at Anfield, where he assisted Daniel Sturridge for Liverpool's second goal in a 4–1 win, before being replaced by Divock Origi.

Ahead of the 2016–17 season, Ojo sustained a fracture in his back and did not return to first team training until mid-November.

On 16 August 2017, Ojo joined Fulham on season-long loan. He scored a double in a 5–4 win over Sheffield United, on 21 November. He scored the winning goal in a 1–0 win over Birmingham City, on 9 December. On 23 December, Ojo received a yellow card and scored in a 2–1 win over Barnsley.

On 30 August 2018, Ojo signed a new contract with Liverpool and joined Stade de Reims on a season-long loan. He also played for Reims II.

As Ojo was born in England, he is eligible to represent England and through his Nigerian heritage is also eligible to play for Nigeria in international football. Ojo has represented England at under-16, under-17, under-18 and under-19 levels. In his early teens, Ojo often played at a higher age group at international level, representing England U17s at the St George's Park Tournament in 2012 aged 15. Ojo represented England U17s in the 2014 Algarve Tournament, with England coming second to Germany after a 1–0 loss in the final game.

In September 2014, Ojo received his first England U18 call-up for a double header against the Netherlands. Ojo appeared in both games with England winning by an aggregate score of 7–2. On 27 August 2015, Ojo received his first call-up to the England U19 team and played 90 minutes in a 3–2 away win over Germany. Later in the same tournament, he started against France and helped "The Young Lions" secure a 2–1 win by providing 2 assists.

Ojo was selected for the England under-20 team in the 2017 FIFA U-20 World Cup. Ojo made his start in tournament in the match against Guinea, and was a substitute in a few other games, including the semifinal match against Italy in which he assisted in two of the goals. In the final, Ojo came on as a substitute for Kieran Dowell in the 62nd minute. England beat Venezuela 1–0, which is England's first win in a global tournament since their World Cup victory of 1966.

In September 2018 he stated he could represent Nigeria in future.

Born in Hemel Hempstead, England, his name "Babajide" is a variant form of the Yoruba name: Babatunde, meaning "Father has Returned" or "Father Comes Back to Life". During his time with the Liverpool Football Academy, Ojo was a student at Rainhill Media Arts College, in Rainhill, England.

England U20



</doc>
<doc id="6696002" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6696002" title="Harry Wilson">
Harry Wilson

Harry Wilson may refer to:





</doc>
<doc id="47852703" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47852703" title="Pedro Chirivella">
Pedro Chirivella

Pedro Chirivella Burgos (; born 23 May 1997) is a Spanish professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Extremadura UD, on loan from English club Liverpool.

Born in Valencia, Spain, Chirivella developed his trade at the academy of local club Valencia where he captained the club at various youth levels.
During his time with Valencia, Chirivella was scouted by a number of European clubs but it was Liverpool who signed him in 2013 along with fellow Spaniard Sergi Canós from Barcelona. In order to aid Chirivella's transition to England, Liverpool moved his family north from Spain and provided them with work and accommodation. He joined up with Liverpool's academy and on 7 July 2014 was one of seven youngsters to be handed a professional contract by the club.

Chirivella received his first taste of senior football when he was included in club manager Brendan Rodgers' squad for Liverpool's pre-season tour of Asia and Australia. During the tour he made his non-competitive debut for Liverpool, coming on as a second-half substitute against HJK Helsinki. He received his first competitive call up later in the season for Liverpool's UEFA Europa League group stage match against Bordeaux on 17 September 2015. In the 28th-minute, following an injury to centre-back Kolo Touré, Chirivella was brought on to make his debut and played out the remainder of a 1–1 draw at the Nouveau Stade de Bordeaux. His next appearance for the club saw him make his FA Cup debut under new manager Jürgen Klopp on 8 January 2016 when he came on as a substitute in a third round match against Exeter City. Liverpool ultimately progressed in the Cup which afforded Chirivella the opportunity to make his first start for the club on 9 February 2016 in a 2–1 defeat against West Ham United in the fourth round replay. Chirivella then signed a new contract with Liverpool on 9 March before making his Premier League debut towards the back end of the season, starting in a 3–1 loss against Swansea City on 1 May.

On 6 January 2017, Liverpool announced that Chirivella, who had spent the first half of the season playing for the club's U23 side, would spend the remainder of the season on loan at Eredivisie club, Go Ahead Eagles in order to gain more first team experience. He made his debut for the club on 13 January 2017, playing the full match in a 3–1 defeat to AZ Alkmaar. The following week, Chirivella scored his first professional goal, heading in the opener from Jarchinio Antonia's cross in a 1–1 draw with Excelsior. He ultimately made 17 appearances for the campaign and scored twice but could not help prevent the club avoid relegation at the end of the season.

On 26 July 2017, Chirivella returned to Netherlands after being loaned to Willem II for the season. He made his debut for the club on 13 August, starting in a 2–1 defeat to Excelsior.

On 31 January 2019, he signed for Spanish club Extremadura UD on loan. On 13 February, however, the club announced he could not play for the first team during the remainder of the season, as his transfer documentations arrived after the time limit.

Chirivella represented Spain at under-17 level and scored twice for them in 15 appearances.

<br>


</doc>
<doc id="58243295" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58243295" title="Kamil Grabara">
Kamil Grabara

Kamil Grabara (born 8 January 1999) is a Polish professional footballer who plays for AGF, on loan from Premier League club Liverpool as a goalkeeper.

Grabara joined Liverpool ahead of the 2016–17 season from Ruch Chorzów for £250,000, and was promoted to the first team squad for the 2018–19 season. He trains regularly with the first-team squad at Melwood and made his maiden senior outing in a pre-season friendly against Tranmere in July 2018.
On 26 September 2018, Grabara was named on the substitutes’ bench for the first time in Liverpool’s 2-1 Carabao Cup defeat to Chelsea at Anfield. On 6 January 2019, Grabara joined AGF on loan until the end of the season.

Grabara is a Polish U21 international having made his debut against Denmark on 14 November 2017.

Grabara is an accomplished, all-round goalkeeper, able to dominate the penalty area, pull out top reflex saves, play out from the back with composure and, as he develops, operate as a sweeper.

Grabara is from Ruda Śląska, in south Poland. He is the second Pole to play in goal for the Reds after Champions League hero Jerzy Dudek.



</doc>
<doc id="1051817" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1051817" title="Allan">
Allan

Allan may refer to:






</doc>
<doc id="47744047" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=47744047" title="Taiwo Awoniyi">
Taiwo Awoniyi

Taiwo Micheal Awoniyi (born 12 August 1997) is a Nigerian professional footballer who plays as a forward for Royal Excel Mouscron on loan from English Premier League club Liverpool. Taiwo's style of play has been compared to that of Rashidi Yekini, Nigeria's all-time highest goalscorer.

In 2010, Taiwo was voted the Most Valuable Player at a Coca-Cola football competition in London. His performance at the competition was spotted by Seyi Olofinjana who made him join Imperial Soccer Academy.

On 31 August 2015, Taiwo signed for Liverpool F.C. for a fee of around £400,000 but was immediately loaned out to FSV Frankfurt.

He made his debut for the club as a late substitute in a German Cup match against Hertha Berlin. After being named as a substitute for six league matches, he made his debut on 19 February 2016, playing 89 minutes against FC St. Pauli. 
With the team of the 2. Bundesliga, Awoniyi suffered relegation and was not kept at the end of the season.

On 26 August 2016, NEC confirmed that he had joined them on a season-long loan and was expected to join the squad the following week after the formalities of his work permit were completed. On 10 September, he made his Eredivisie debut in a 40 defeat of NEC to PSV Eindhoven, being replaced in the 72nd minute by Michael Heinloth.
With Nijmegen, the Nigerian suffered his second consecutive relegation, being relegated from Eredivisie in 2017.

In July 2017 Awoniyi left Nijmegen and joined Belgian club Royal Excel Mouscron on a season-long loan, and on his debut on 12 August (also his birthday) started the match against KSC Lokeren and scored within 23 minutes.

On 17 July 2018 he signed a new long-term deal with Liverpool and on 23 July sealed a season-long loan to another Belgian club, KAA Gent. On 11 January 2019, it was announced that his loan to Gent was cut short, and Awoniyi was loaned to Mouscron again.

Taiwo represented Nigeria at the 2013 FIFA U-17 World Cup and went on to win the tournament, scoring four goals during the competition. He also represented Nigeria at the 2015 FIFA U-20 World Cup in New Zealand after winning the 2015 African U-20 Championship in Senegal.

On 12 April 2015, he scored a brace on his debut for the Nigeria U-23 team in a match against Zambia, as his team went on to qualify for the 2015 All African Games.

He was selected by Nigeria for their 35-man provisional squad for the 2016 Summer Olympics.

International

In recognition for his performance at the 2013 FIFA U-17 World Cup competition, Taiwo along with his teammates were bestowed with the Member of the Order of the Niger award. It was also reported in the media that there were plans by the Kwara State House of Assembly to name a major street after him.

He married his partner Taiwo Jesudun in an engagement and traditional wedding in Kabba on Friday 15 June 2018, followed by a white wedding on 16 June in Ilorin.



</doc>
